# Acknowledgements

We are indebted to the residents of Imangara, Kwale Kwale and
Mungalawurru communities in the Northern Territory for sharing their
time and knowledge with us, and for their active involvement in what
they referred to as ‘the computer project’.

*Internet on the Outstation* is the result of a multi-year collaboration
between the Swinburne Institute for Social Research, the Centre for
Appropriate Technology (CAT), the Central Land Council (CLC), and the
Australian Communications Consumer Action Network (ACCAN). Ellie Rennie,
Eleanor Hogan and Julian Thomas were all based at Swinburne when the
research and writing for this book occurred. Andrew Crouch and Robin
Gregory were working at CAT, and Alyson Wright was working for the CLC.

CAT is an Aboriginal not-for-profit organization that works towards
sustainable livelihoods for those living in remote communities, and
conducts research into, and development of, appropriate technologies.
CAT was formed in the 1980s when the outstation movement was gaining
momentum, and much of its work today is still focused on small remote
communities, known as ‘outstations’. In CAT’s definition, appropriate
technologies meet the economic, cultural, environmental and social needs
of the people, and design and development occurs through consultation
and collaboration with communities. In his history of CAT, Alan Mayne
writes that CAT’s ‘appropriate technologies’, ‘together with the
research and design process that produces them, their regular servicing
and the training and education programmes that inform their use, are
making a difference in communities throughout remote Australia’.[^1]

The CLC is a statutory body set up under the Aboriginal Land Rights Act
(NT). The CLC’s history is deeply imbued with Aboriginal justice,
recognition and the fight for land rights. The primary functions of the
CLC are to help traditional landowners in the management of their
country in the southern half of the Northern Territory. Through advocacy
and policy work, the ninety-member Council also represents the
interests, rights and concerns of Aboriginal people across regions.

The CLC believes that the provision of access to communication
technologies is an essential service in remote communities. The focus of
much of their work in this area has been on addressing disadvantages in
service and access levels for remote residents, affordability issues,
rights to service and increasing the choice of communication options for
remote communities. The CLC remains concerned about the future of small
remote communities in Central Australia because of a lack of funding
commitment from both levels of government, and an increasing move to
prioritize larger communities when allocating funding. This is despite a
robust determination of traditional owners to remain living on or near
their country.

ACCAN is Australia’s peak body for consumer representation in
communications, spanning residential consumers and small businesses,
including not-for profit organizations, insofar as they are consumers.
ACCAN assists people to make good choices about products and services,
and makes representations to policy makers and industry on behalf of its
broad and diverse membership.

The Swinburne Institute for Social Research is located within Swinburne
University of Technology in Melbourne. A core group of researchers
within the Institute is looking at digital transformations, and how they
are impacting on Australia’s economy, social inclusion, cultural policy,
health and wellbeing. The Institute is also a node of the ARC Centre of
Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation (CCI), led by Stuart
Cunningham, and our research in Central Australia was conducted as part
of CCI’s wider research program on the social, economic and cultural
dimensions of broadband services.

A number of people from each of these organizations provided additional
assistance during the project. Thanks are due to Ruth Elvin for her
encouragement and advice during her time at CAT; Julian Cleary and Peter
Donohoe from CLC for stepping in during Alyson’s maternity leave; Robin
McNaughton, Michael Charlton, Teresa Corbin, Una Lawrence and Ryan
Sengara from ACCAN for their contributions; and Jake Goldenfein from
Swinburne for assisting us during the Papunya research fieldwork, and
for collaborating on research into the Northern Territory Emergency
Response (NTER; known as ‘the Intervention’).

The research was funded in three phases. ACCAN’s Grants Scheme funded
the first phase of the project (the ‘baseline study’) in 2010. As the
peak consumer representation body in communications, ACCAN awards grants
each year for research and advocacy projects that align with its goal of
available, accessible and affordable communications for all Australians.
We are very grateful to ACCAN for kickstarting this research, and for
continuing on the project after that grant concluded. CCI’s support,
especially in the early stages of the work, was also critical.

The Aboriginals Benefit Account funded the hardware, maintenance and
training components of the project. As described in the book, CAT led
the technical and training aspects of the work, and undertook regular
visits to the communities to provide them with assistance.

The data collection for the social research (2011-2014) was funded
through an Australian Research Council (ARC) Linkage Project grant. In
addition to the ARC funding, each organization contributed substantial
in-kind time. In particular, CAT provided Andrew’s time, CLC provided
Alyson’s time (and car), and Swinburne contributed Ellie and Julian’s
time. The Swinburne research team also received a grant from Google
Australia, which enabled us to do additional work on the NTER
legislation and its implications for publicly-funded computers.

During the course of the project, we conducted research in two larger
communities. We would like to thank the people of Ali Curung and Papunya
for allowing us to carry out this work. In particular, we thank Jessie
Simpson and Roseanne Holmes, who worked with Ellie and Alyson to
administer the Ali Curung survey, and provided invaluable cultural
advice regarding questions to be included. Derek Walker assisted Peter
Donohoe with the ‘men’s side’ of the Ali Curung survey. We are grateful
to both of them for helping rectify the gender imbalance in our original
survey results. We also thank Sammy Butcher at Papunya for his support
of the study; Ashton Kealy, Mary McMullen, Rebecca Smith and Ryan
Raggatt for their assistance in the computer room; and Jenny and Blair
McFarland at the Central Australian Youth Link Up Service (CAYLUS) for
providing ongoing information about ICT arrangements in the MacDonnell
region.

We wish also to thank the members of the Project Reference Group for
their advice and guidance. Membership of the Reference Group shifted
over time, and included representatives of the Australian government
Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy; the
Indigenous Remote Communications Association; the ARC Centre of
Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation; and senior officers
of the sponsoring organizations.

Broadband for the Bush (B4B) emerged as a key forum for us to discuss
our findings over the course of the project, and to make connections
with other organizations working on similar issues. We thank the members
of B4B for their committed advocacy and policy development work, and for
bringing the communication needs of Indigenous people living in remote
areas to the attention of policymakers and telcos.

Finally, the genesis of this work was a conversation between two old
friends in 2009: Julian Thomas, Director of the Swinburne Institute for
Social Research, and the late Peter Taylor when he was CEO of CAT. Ellie
Rennie (who was living in Alice Springs and working for the Swinburne
Institute) was introduced to CAT through that connection, and began to
explore the issue of the digital divide with Andrew Crouch in 2009. The
project would not have happened if it were not for Peter’s passion for
communications and his deep knowledge of the circumstances of remote
communities. His sudden death in 2013 was a great loss for central
Australia.

Sections of this book have been adapted from our own prior publications:
the opening anecdote comes from an *Inside Story* article.[^2] Part of
the cyber safety discussion in Chapter 5 was also published in *Inside
Story*.[^3] The discussion of gender in Chapter 7 appears in *Australian
Aboriginal Studies*.[^4] We published the findings from the baseline
study in *Telecommunications Policy*, and the findings from the 2009
computer center survey (discussed in Chapter 1) in *Communication
Politics and Culture*.[^5]

[^1]: A. Mayne, *Alternative Interventions: Aboriginal homelands,
    outback Australia and the Centre for Appropriate Technology*,
    Adelaide: Wakefield Press, 2014, p. 136.

[^2]: E. Rennie, ‘Internet on the Outstation’, *Inside Story,* 9 May
    2011, http://insidestory.org.au/internet-on-the-outstation.

[^3]: E. Hogan, ‘Beyond the Mulga Curtain’, 11 July, 2014, *Inside
    Story,* http://insidestory.org.au/behind-the-mulga-curtain.

[^4]: E. Hogan, Gender and ICT access in remote central Australian Aboriginal contexts, *Australian Aboriginal Studies*, 2016.1 (2016).

[^5]: E. Rennie, A. Crouch, A. Wright and J. Thomas, ‘At Home on the
    Outstation: Barriers to Home Internet in Remote Indigenous
    Communities’, *Communication, Politics and Culture,* 43.1 (2013):
    48-69.
    E. Rennie, A. Crouch, J. Thomas and P. Taylor, ‘Beyond Public
    Access? Reconsidering Broadband for Remote Indigenous Communities’,
    *Communication, Politics and Culture*, 43.1 (2010): 583–593.
