# PART I

## <span id="_Toc419811695" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811494" class="anchor"></span></span>Chapter 1: Policy

On our way to the Barkly communities, we travelled on the road named
after the first European explorer to make the journey from Australia’s
south to north coasts, John McDouall Stuart, for which he was paid a
commission associated with the establishment of a telegraph line. We
passed two heritage telegraph repeater stations, one at our starting
point in Alice Springs and the other 280 kilometers north at Barrow
Creek. Now tourist destinations, the small stone buildings once housed
the equipment and operators that connected Adelaide to Darwin and Great
Britain. On one particular trip, we asked the bar tender at the Barrow
Creek roadhouse how long he had been living there. He simply pointed to
graffiti on the wall, where he, or someone before him, had scrawled the
words ‘long enough’.

Some months after that trip, in 2014, Barrow Creek received mobile phone
coverage as part of a public-private partnership blackspots program to
extend mobile coverage and internet access to remote communities.
Telstra, the private partner, issued a statement saying that the site
was chosen partly for its proximity to fibre optic cable. The Northern
Territory government stated that the tower was to serve highway and
wayside coverage, rather than to service nearby Aboriginal communities
and a school, which remained outside of the coverage area.[^1]

The Barrow Creek mobile story illustrates the complexities of
communications infrastructure provision in remote areas: the cost
imperative (in this instance related to the use of existing
infrastructure), and the different needs of various population groups,
which include the ‘grey nomad’ campervan tourists who travel the Stuart
Highway, service providers, and Aboriginal communities. The ABC quoted a
resident of Tara, a small community near Barrow Creek, who had purchased
a mobile phone in anticipation of being able to ring her daughter in
Alice Springs from home: ‘I'm sad for us (because) I turned it on and it
didn't switch on’, said Selma Thompson. ‘It was a waste’.[^2]

The everyday life of residents of remote Indigenous communities is
unlike that of most Australians in very many ways. Remote communities
are small, isolated settlements, separated by great distances. While
they offer many rich social and cultural benefits for their residents,
they have poor transport connections, little infrastructure and scarce
resources. But as it does for other Australians, life in remote
communities involves communications: with family members in other
places, with social networks, and with governments, organizations, and
businesses. Reliable communications for the people who live and work in
remote Australia are all the more essential on account of their
isolation, and unlike urban Australians, they have never taken these for
granted. Despite many positive developments, adequate communications are
still not the reality for most Indigenous communities, and the problem
of securing them has been a challenging and defining issue from the
beginning.

This chapter discusses the policy contexts of the problem. Policy
matters because governments have defined, regulated and largely funded
the communications sector in remote Australia, and because governments
continue to play a paternalistic role, albeit a contested one, in
Indigenous citizens’ lives. But these two policy registers –
communications and Indigenous affairs – have very different histories,
institutional settings and policy languages. Communications has been a
core Commonwealth responsibility, and a reasonably important agency,
under different guises, since Federation. Despite many large changes in
structure and policy, this is a field where the Commonwealth has long
been certain of its role. Indigenous Affairs, by contrast, is a much
more difficult, arduous and wicked problem, which has involved
continuing inter-governmental skirmishes as to the division of
responsibilities. Unlike communications, the Commonwealth’s work in
Indigenous affairs has failed to find any ongoing institutional
location, with successive shifts from a dedicated department to the
Indigenous-elected Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
(ATSIC), an element within social services, and most recently an
anomalous, operational wing of the Prime Minister’s department. Far from
heralding the progress of Indigenous affairs to the center of national
public administration, these migrations signal a volatile history of
reversals and revisions, where a lack of governmental confidence is
reflected above all in the scant regard paid to domain expertise,
experience or memory.[^3]

It should not be surprizing that these different administrative channels
have tangled relations, producing outcomes that occasionally connect but
generally bear little relation to one another. We must therefore make an
artificial distinction between the communication activities that
interest us, and the social settings in which they occur – not because
such a distinction is useful, but because the prism of public policy
frequently separates these elements, and treats them differently. We
start by considering communications, and then move to the Indigenous
policy domain.

### Issues and Imperatives for Remote Communications

If Australian governments have struggled to comprehend the needs and
circumstances of remote Australians, this is despite the fact that the
geography and social reach of communications has been a common thread in
policy and politics since Federation. And if Australia’s distinctive
human and physical geographies did not themselves make debates about
subsidizing rural and regional services an inevitable feature of policy
argument, the political economy of the settlements struck between the
new Australian states ensured it would be so. A national government
required, in effect, a single market for communications, whether these
were postal services, telegraphy, or phone calls. In the case of central
Australia, governments, rather than the market, have directly shaped
communications from the early colonial period. For our purposes, the key
developments are recent. Remote communications assumed a new and urgent
shape as a problem of contemporary public policy in the first decade of
the millennium, at the same time as broadband communications and the
mobile internet were becoming embedded in the everyday lives of
mainstream, urban Australians.

Understanding how that happened – and the outcomes for remote
communities – involves recognizing two connected processes of policy
change that were well underway at this time. First, there was a process
of digital transformation, driven not only by technical advances in
infrastructure, devices and applications, but, most importantly, by how
governments and others responded to new communications technologies.
From the 1980s onwards, new communications had undermined confidence in
the longstanding model of a government-owned monopoly provider. Then, as
mobile and the internet took off, social services, health and community
services, education, entertainment, work and commerce began to be
redesigned on the assumption that national populations would have access
to the necessary infrastructure at an affordable price, and would have
the skills and motivations to make use of it. This dynamic had many
benefits, while presenting a critical problem, but also an opportunity,
for those not online. One effect was to emphasize the increasing
relative disadvantage of those Australians without broadband or reliable
mobile coverage. While steadily increasing numbers of Australians went
online, the question of how to assist and support those without good
communications did not diminish in corresponding fashion; instead it
grew in importance as a matter for policy and politics.

The second formative change underway over this period was the
liberalization of the telecommunications industry, framed by a new,
competitive, regulatory model, the incremental sale of Telstra from 1997
onwards, and the subsequent planning and establishment of the NBN. This
is not the place for a full review of this history, but we should
briefly focus on two turn-of-the-century policy imperatives: the Telstra
sale, and the creation of a competitive market for telecommunications.
In micro-economic terms, there was no simple relation between these.
Paul Keating’s Labor government had been more concerned with fostering
competition, particularly through the entry into the market of Optus as
a second carrier. The Coalition government led by John Howard
prioritized the sale; as it transpired, the effect of that was not more
competition, but the consolidation of Telstra’s position as a dominant
market player combining control of the infrastructure with a pre-eminent
position in retail. This market problem was a key factor in the later
development of the National Broadband Network (NBN). At a political and
social level, the sale required the support of regionally-based
politicians, both within the National Party and outside it. These
politicians and their constituencies were motivated by a strong sense of
rural and regional disadvantage, and were not naturally inclined to
support the disposal of a public enterprise.

On the strength of objections from rural and regional interests,
legislation to complete the full sale of Telstra failed in the Senate in
1998. A staged approach, a series of regular reviews, funded programs
and accommodations were then necessary for the government to proceed
with further public offerings of Telstra shares. The sale was therefore
a gradual process, but it represented a slow-motion conclusion to a long
period of public control over Australia’s chief communications networks,
and the commencement of an ongoing and unstable period of regulation,
review and subsidy. A proliferation of large and small publicly-funded
schemes, generally short-term, were devised to meet the needs of those
users who could not be provided for by market forces alone. It is
important to note that the question of communications services for
Indigenous communities came into focus through this particular optic:
the perspective of a larger population of telecommunications users,
including consumers, businesses, and public entities, who were captured
under the rubric of rural, remote and regional Australia. This
positioning gave Indigenous organizations – increasingly capable as
sources of policy innovation over this period – a voice and a place at
the communications policy table, where the ‘adequacy’ and ‘equitable’
distribution of services was at issue.

The mobilization of diverse interests in ‘regional telecommunications’
did not always translate into well-directed initiatives: the term has
always struggled to cohere the wide range of experiences, problems and
situations of all those excluded from mainstream urban infrastructure.
From the first regional telecommunications inquiry in 2000 to the
present, Indigenous voices have had to emphasize the particularity of
circumstances in their societies. Submissions consistently argue the
need to design and implement programs with community involvement, and
with on-the-ground knowledge of the conditions and circumstances. As
this book argues, basic categories that have passed largely unconsidered
in mainstream communications, such as the role of communities, or the
continuity of the household as a stable organization for the consumption
of services, have generally demanded far more careful thought when
placed in an Indigenous context.

Nevertheless, a patchwork of major and minor initiatives followed from
1997 onwards, many of them in direct response to the now-regular cycle
of regional communications reviews. While most estimates in this period
considered around 2 per cent of Australians to be living in locations
where commercial communications services were not viable, a considerable
amount of public funding supported services beyond that roughly-defined
group. Several different approaches were at work. For instance, general
purpose grants were offered by Networking the Nation (1997-2004), which
used \$250million in proceeds from the sale of Telstra to support
improved telecommunications for regional, rural and remote communities.
Customer subsidies, intended to offset the greater cost of services
outside the cities, were offered through Broadband Connect (2005), a
\$900million four-year program then replaced by the Australian Broadband
Guarantee (2007-2011), which funded internet service providers to offer
a basic broadband service for remote users.

More targeted programs have focussed on remote Indigenous community
needs. The Telecommunications Action Plan for Remote Indigenous
Communities (TAPRIC) (2002), Backing Indigenous Ability (2007-10) and
the successor Indigenous Communications Program (ICP) funded community
projects. Much of the funding in these programs was dedicated to the
provision of public payphones. According to the 2005-2006 Budget,
TAPRIC’s initiatives sought ‘to overcome a number of complex logistical
and social factors affecting the provision of basic telephone services
in remote Indigenous communities’.[^4] TAPRIC funded the Community
Phones Program, which rolled out public phones designed by the Centre
for Appropriate Technology (CAT) for the specific needs of remote
communities. It also involved a stocktake of the existing infrastructure
in remote communities, drawing on Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS)
survey data.

Alongside these specific-purpose programs, a number of longer-term
responses to regional disadvantage in a liberalized system were enacted,
with lasting consequences. Concerns about consumer safeguards were
addressed through a service guarantee, designed to ensure that
telecommunications providers repaired faults and dealt with problems in
timely manner. Telstra, as the dominant network operator, has been
funded to provide, among other public interest services such as
payphones, a standard telephone service (STS) under a Universal Service
Obligation (USO).

The USO has been an ongoing topic of debate in Australia, particularly
in regard to its impact on competition, what should be included in the
USO, and its susceptibility to political interests.[^5] In theory, a USO
is a market design mechanism that works to transfer some of the consumer
surplus from one group as an implicit subsidy to another group by
effectively forcing a monopoly provider to treat them all as a single
market, and by prohibiting price discrimination. A core rationale for
the USO in Australia is to provide access to telecommunications for
those residing outside cities. The result should be that everyone
receives the same supply and pays the same price: the USO thus imposes a
kind of transfer from urban to remote consumers via a single provider.
However, this has not been the reality.

The policy problems of the USO have emerged gradually, but are now
manifold and prominent. First, Telstra has not seen the USO as extending
to remote services, especially for smaller communities, thereby creating
the need for a succession of gap-filling programs. Consumers in remote
Australia are generally not able to access landlines (the STS) as the
cost of cables and trenches is still borne by the consumer (and are
prohibitive).

Second, the STS is conceived in terms of specific technologies and
services, which are of diminishing relevance everywhere, and especially
in remote Australia[^6]. It cannot then reflect the evolving needs of
communications users, which now extend well beyond basic telephony, or
the rollout of new broadband networks that do not rely on Telstra’s
copper infrastructure. Voice services are increasingly used through
internet applications that are more flexible, and cheaper than the STS,
with support for video, messaging and other functions. But internet
access is not part of the USO. Mobile cellular services are vital for
network access, but neither are these the focus of the USO. Indeed, the
failure of the USO model brings into focus one of the central arguments
of this book: the need for a more flexible policy framework for ensuring
continuing funding for uneconomic services, and which can respond to
local community circumstances and preferences.

The election of the Rudd Labor government in 2007 marked a shift away
from the cycle of end-user subsidy schemes towards a more ambitious
rethinking of Australia’s communications system. The NBN was conceived
as a universally-accessible high-speed network that would ensure
Australia’s place in the future ‘digital economy’. It was intended as a
general solution to regional and remote disadvantage, through a uniform
pricing structure and advanced satellite and fixed wireless services for
those households and premises beyond the reach of viable fibre
infrastructure. But the network also embodied a micro-economic reform
agenda, with NBN’s neutral wholesale role taking over from Telstra’s
compromised position in the market, and a service design that would
encourage and enable a more diverse range of large and small
retailers.[^7]

For remote communities, the rollout of the NBN meant the closure of the
Broadband Guarantee scheme – which had not in any case been easy to
access (see Chapter 2) – and the introduction of an ‘interim satellite
service’ (ISS), replaced in 2016 by the much greater-capacity ‘long term
satellite solution’ (LTSS), using two new satellites. The ISS was
rapidly fully subscribed, and attracted considerable criticism in the
2011 and 2015 regional telecommunications reviews. Bodies such as the
Flying Doctor Service drew particular attention to the inability of the
service to support time-critical applications such as remote medical
consultations.[^8] While the long-term solution is likely to
considerably improve the performance of the satellite-delivered NBN, the
2015 review forecast a rapid growth in use, and recommended a number of
measures to improve the service.

While the NBN will provide a more capable source for the internet on the
outstation, it has long been clear that there cannot be any single
infrastructure ‘fix’ for the digital divide in remote Australia. The ICP
was intended to be a targeted supply and maintenance program for fixed
community phones, mobile satellite phones for very small communities
(oddly not covered by the USO), and equipment and training for internet
access. The program evolved in interesting ways, reflecting the
evolution of communications in the bush from basic telephony to the
broader range of internet-enabled services, and from simple shared
facilities, such as payphones, to a more varied ecology of mobile
devices. So while the ICP began with a focus on payphones, over its
course we can see this infrastructure being re-conceptualized as
general-purpose internet access points, offering not only a phone but
also a wireless access point which could then be shared, with mobile
devices, across a group of users. The development and installation of
the phones, managed for the Department of Communications by Australian
Private Networks (2014), is a remarkable story of ingenuity, opportunism
and resourcefulness. The addition of the Wi-Fi capability to the
community phone was first trialed at the Laura Dance Festival on Cape
York in June 2011, and proved instantly popular. The festival organizer
reported later that she could not have run the festival without the
Wi-Fi.

As part of Labor’s ‘Closing the Gap’ strategy to redress Indigenous
disadvantage, internet access was also provided through a Commonwealth
funding agreement with the states and territories, the Remote Indigenous
Public Internet Access (RIPIA) National Partnership Agreement. In the
Northern Territory, the RIPIA contract was awarded to Northern Territory
Libraries. RIPIA reflected the broader social policy agenda of Closing
the Gap, and signaled a more developed and far-reaching set of concerns
than the earlier emphasis on ‘adequate’ communications and ‘equitable’
access. These new goals appear to reflect the more ambitious aspirations
of the early NBN period. Better internet access was understood
explicitly in terms of building economic and social capital in
communities. The objectives were to reduce barriers to services,
increase digital literacy and social inclusion, and economic, social and
political participation. It followed from this broad vision of the
benefits of the internet that, as well as establishing services,
maintenance and training would also be supported. This expansive agenda
cut in two ways. The social dimensions of internet access were also
reflected in a requirement that filtering mechanisms be in place for
‘illegal and offensive materials’. These provisions could well have
ameliorated community concerns about internet access; they also echoed
the more draconian and paternalistic tenor of those restrictions on
computer use that had been imposed under the Howard government Northern
Territory Emergency Response (NTER; ‘the Intervention’). However, the
RIPIA project was limited in what it could reasonably achieve. Northern
Territory Libraries set out to provide access and training in forty
sites (the majority in the Top End, not the central desert region),
receiving only \$6,000 per annum per site for equipment, and a similar
amount for training (Broadband for the Bush Alliance, 2013). The program
was therefore not able to cater for small communities during the period
we are concerned with. In 2015 the national RIPIA program funding was
redirected into the Indigenous Advancement Strategy, amounting to
\$2.2million to provide ‘essential infrastructure such as computers,
printers and internet access points to improve internet literacy and
educational outcomes for children and adults in around seventy-five
remote communities’, and administered through a competitive grants-based
process.[^9]

What has been the result of these policy and program decisions? One
result has been that, for over a decade, the dominant mode of provision
was shared facilities, in the form of dedicated computer rooms or shared
computers in existing public spaces. Networking the Nation, TAPRIC, the
ICP and the RIPIA program have all incorporated this approach to varying
degrees.

The resulting facilities do appear to have been an important means for
internet access in some communities, at least in the early years. The
2001 census included questions that enabled A.E. Daly to estimate the
difference between home internet use and internet use ‘generally’, which
might include access at a community center, library, workplace or
home.[^10] She found that internet use for Indigenous people living
outside the capital cities in South Australia and the Northern Territory
was three times higher than home use, which was not the case for the
non-Indigenous population. (From 2006 onwards the census has only
measured internet access from private dwellings.)

In 2009 we undertook a survey of shared internet facilities in the
central Australia region. The research involved phone interviews with
supervisors or council workers in the thirty-four large communities in
central Australia (with a combined Indigenous population of 9,724, or 72
per cent of the Indigenous population of central Australia outside Alice
Springs) and visits to ten of those communities. From this we gathered
basic information, including whether centers existed, whether they were
in continuous use, the number of hours they were open, how the centers
were funded, user charges, internet speeds and download quotas, as well
as supervision arrangements. We also asked survey respondents to provide
anecdotal comment on the level and use of activities that occurred in
those sites. We found that while shared facilities have played an
important role in establishing communications infrastructure,
sustainability was a significant concern in many instances.[^11]

We found that less than half of the thirty-four communities had
community internet access and, of these, many were only semi-functional.
Thirteen communities had at least some working computers for community
use as of December 2009. Fourteen were without and four were under
development. We were unable to obtain information for three communities.
The computers were located in council offices, training centers,
Centrelink offices, remote Indigenous broadcasting stations (RIBS) and
schools. Many facilities were only semi-active, operating with part-time
or no supervision, or waiting on maintenance and upgrades.

In one community, there was a room in the council administration
building that had once been allocated and equipped with computers for
residents’ use, but at the time of survey the computing equipment had
been dismantled and the room given over to use as the community housing
office. This ICT center had not been operational for the past two years.
Another community was faring better with four operational computers of
varying ages, sharing satellite internet access with the council in a
room provided by the council in its administration building. However,
the room was only semi-active at the time of the survey, and there was
little in the way of training and mentoring support available to
residents. In another, one of the metropolitan universities was
sponsoring internet services in a small public computing building with
six computers, using volunteer supervisors where these could be
recruited to assist and train residents in using applications such as
email, music downloading and internet banking. However, maintaining a
steady flow of volunteers who were able to devote sufficient time to
settling into the community, gaining the confidence of the residents and
making a lasting contribution to their computer learning was difficult.
A town camp was awaiting four computers for their community building,
which would ultimately be connected by mobile internet with the
assistance of their council.

As these examples demonstrate, community media centers have encountered
major obstacles, and in general have only provided limited access. A
report from September 2003 for the then Department of Communications, IT
and the Arts, commissioned in response to the 2002 TAPRIC
recommendations, warned that Commonwealth and state-funded centers were
already at risk and unlikely to be viable without government
support.[^12] The report found that cooperative centers with a range of
stakeholders were more likely to succeed, as funding overheads could be
shared. Our survey confirmed this observation. Moreover, as discussed
below, government policy and funding, including for programs such as
RIPIA, has chiefly been directed to Indigenous communities with
populations greater than 300 people, the idea being that the residents
of smaller settlements will travel to larger towns to access services.
We had little evidence of residents of the three outstations making use
of shared computer rooms in other communities when we commenced in 2010.

In 2014 in the central Australia region, computer rooms were operating
at Papunya, Mt Alan, Laramba, Mt Liebig, Kintore, Harts Range, Lake
Nash, Areyonga, Amoonguna, Ikuntji, Docker River, Tjwanpa, Titjikala and
Papunya. The Yuendumu Computer Centre was closed, and Ali Curung’s
computer room was dormant. Although the shared facilities approach has
been fraught, there have been some notable successes. As discussed in
later chapters, we visited the Papunya Internet and Computer Room on a
couple of occasions to gauge how remote community members were using
computers and the internet at a known successful shared internet
facility. As of late 2015, that center had also closed.

### A Multiplicity of Programs and Reviews 

The field of remote communications is characterized by an episodic
sequence of programs and reviews, each with different emphases and
developing in different ways. As mentioned above, many of these have
funded the establishment of facilities, but not their ongoing operation.
This was an issue addressed in the first regional telecommunications
review, when Besley argued that the ongoing costs of community
facilities could be supported by a proportion of the universal cost
attributable to the community.[^13] Many have funded access, but not
training, or training, but not the development of relevant content and
applications. Limited by the legacy of the ‘adequacy’ problem, they have
rarely approached digital engagement from the perspective of users, who
must deal with all of these dimensions of the new information and
communication services.

While policy reviews have raised the profile of this issue, their
frequency has encouraged a degree of policy churn. The reviews play a
useful ‘monitory’ function, holding governments and commercial parties
accountable. But they have also created a start-stop dynamic, and
fostered an environment where the longer-term research and evaluation
problems have been put to one side, while increasingly familiar advocacy
– from one sector or another – takes its place. Every review notes the
need for more research, but surprizingly little has been done. A better
approach, as the 2015 RTIRC suggests, would be to develop a more robust
set of indicators, especially regarding the spatial distribution of
facilities and services, and a more ambitious research program, aiming
for a systematic understanding of the patterns and dynamics of take-up
and use.[^14] With that in hand, frequent reviews should not be needed
for us to monitor effectively the performance of our networks, and the
benefits they may bring to remote communities.

### Governing Remote Communities

A feature of the governmental landscape around remote communities are
the discontinuities within and between different regulatory and policy
positions. There has been no ready trade in concepts, ideas or
objectives between communications policies on the one hand, and
Indigenous affairs on the other. While the NBN promised to provide
high-speed internet to Australians everywhere, other elements of
government concentrated service delivery into larger towns. While public
funds were being invested in encouraging computer skills, broadly-framed
restrictions were being implemented that controlled the use of computers
(in particular, restrictions under the NTER during the 2007-2011
period). At the beginning of this chapter, we spoke of the two registers
of policy: a communications approach, framed around ‘adequacy’ and
equity of access to services, and a more paternalistic Indigenous policy
approach with an emphasis on welfare and control. This simple contrast
certainly overlooks the diverse motivations and practices of government
in remote Australia. But it also prepares us for starkly different
approaches and orientations from different policy domains.

In terms of access to services, Aboriginal communities have a particular
character and plight in comparison with other localities with the same
remoteness status, due to the historical circumstances of their
formation. The larger Aboriginal communities, and some smaller ones that
predated the outstation movement, were not created as self-sustaining
towns, but were formed from Christian missions and ration stations under
policies to encourage centralization, forced sedentariness and
assimilation.

For instance, a senior woman at Imangara spoke to us of growing up at
Hatches Creek before the outstation was established. Her memories were
prompted by printouts from a website that someone at the Central Land
Council (CLC) had given her, which included an oral history by Joan
Deans, wife of the policeman who was based at the waterhole near Hatches
Creek. From 1913 until sometime in the 1970s, Hatches Creek was a mining
settlement, producing wolframite, a mineral used in the manufacture of
ammunition for the first and second world wars. She explained to us that
Warlpiri camped on one side of the waterhole and Alyawarr on the other.
They also worked in the mines, presumably alongside the Chinese
indentured workers mentioned on the website, and received rations. In a
separate conversation she mentioned that when she was a kid ‘everyone
was working’, and they had to wait in line to receive tea, brown sugar
and flour. Hatches Creek shrank to fewer than a dozen people after the
mines closed down, while other such communities grew into sizeable
townships.

From the 1970s, a fundamentally discriminatory legislative system began
to be challenged, and Indigenous Australians were granted citizenship
rights. Under the Whitlam government, the era of assimilation gave way
to new policies of self-determination, including what has been referred
to as the ‘outstation movement’.[^15] In the words of the Aborigines’
Progressive Association in 1968, returning land to Aboriginal people was
an ‘assuagement to hurt sensibilities’ that could restore Aboriginal
dignity.[^16] Policy papers from the time expressed an expectation that
a return to country would help overcome a ‘culture of poverty’, lead to
self-determination and provide Indigenous people with the power to
negotiate over use of land (for instance, with mining companies).

Those who returned to their country were able to access grants to build
sewerage systems, basic roads, water and electricity from 1972 –
infrastructure not intended to meet conventional standards, but to
provide assistance that would be supplemented by community efforts,
including the development of makeshift shelters or humpies.[^17] A
landmark development came in 1976 when the Fraser government passed the
Aboriginal Land Rights (NT) Act, which provided a legal mechanism for
Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory to reclaim their ancestral
lands, including direct transfer of missions and reserves to Aboriginal
freehold land, and the ability to fight for land that currently wasn’t
already claimed. Further development of outstations occurred through the
Community Development Employment Program (CDEP), a subsidized community
employment program, from the late 1980s. Funding for housing came later
during the late 1980s and in the 1990s through ATSIC when people could
prove their willingness to live remotely.

The Aboriginal Land Rights Act returned large areas of lands to the
Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory, although it only allowed
ability to claim unoccupied land. Half of the land mass in the Northern
Territory is now owned by Aboriginal people. The majority of outstations
are on Aboriginal land, although some are on excisions from pastoral
leases (known as Community Living Areas, CLA) or in national parks. The
outstations on CLAs form a critical part of the outstations, or
homelands, footprint, signalling how some groups remained connected to
their lands, despite appropriation of land by pastoralists.[^18] Two
outstations in this story, Mungalawurra and Kwale Kwale, are on
Aboriginal land, whereas Imangara is a CLA.

Outstations are thus settlements where the residents have a
descent-based affiliation, and recognized ownership over the land.
People returned to country in order to maintain traditional sites, to
fulfil their cultural obligations to manage land, and in some cases to
avoid political marginalisation in the larger settlements where the
artificial collocation of diverse groups had resulted in significant
stresses for those who were not traditional owners or who were
descendants of the minority language group. As time progressed,
outstations also had the appeal of being removed from the social
problems of larger settlements, such as alcohol and violence.[^19]

Today there are approximately 400 occupied outstations in the Northern
Territory, with a population of around 10,000 living in 2,400 dwellings
(about 25 per cent of the rural Aboriginal population of the Northern
Territory).[^20] In the public imagination, outstations have come to
represent ‘extreme living’, in the sense that they are isolated, with
limited access to services and little infrastructure, and are thus
represented as a choice to live apart from the majority in favor of
maintaining tradition.[^21]

In a submission to a 2003 review of outstation policy, CAT pointed out
that outstations have been subject to a coordination problem, falling
through the net of available services, with resource agencies struggling
to meet the costs of outstation operation, battling to extract user
contributions to such costs, and under pressure by the ad hoc nature of
funding programs.[^22] Such concerns regarding the coordination and
transparency of funding and programs to outstations continue to this
day. Some of the problems recounted to us by the communities reflect the
ongoing challenge of maintaining outstations.

When our project commenced in 2010, outstations had become the focus of
political contention around how best to overcome Indigenous
disadvantage. In July 2008, coinciding with the NTER and prior to our
first consultations, the Commonwealth began divesting itself of funding
responsibility for outstations, handing what was available to state and
territory governments[^23]. Some saw the move as reducing duplications
and creating economies of scale to provide services.[^24] The Northern
Territory government’s policy development – designed to coordinate
infrastructure and services and ‘set a new path for outstations’ –
received wide criticism. In Pat Dodson’s words, outstations were being
left to ‘wither on the vine’.[^25]

There was a growing inclination amongst some right-wing think tanks to
regard outstations as entrenching disadvantage and reducing people’s
opportunities. For instance, the demonization of location was apparent
in the Commonwealth Minister for Indigenous Affairs’ description of
remote communities and outstations as ‘cultural museums’, and in
commentator Helen Hughes describing the outstations movements as a form
of apartheid and a failed ‘socialist utopia’.[^26] Further, Gary Johns
argued that the residents of remote communities and outstations should
migrate to towns with greater employment opportunities.[^27]

Hughes’ and Johns’ ideas are likely to have been influential in the
policy shift away from supporting outstations and small communities
towards a focus on larger Indigenous communities, known as ‘priority
communities’ by the Council of Australian Governments (COAG), or ‘Growth
Towns’ in the Northern Territory. COAG’s National Partnership Agreements
saw new funding directed to ‘priority towns’, with both government
policies aiming to support a limited number of communities with
additional funding resources to the point where facilities would be
comparable with those in equivalent-sized regional towns. While the
Commonwealth and Northern Territory government groups were not
identical, there was a high degree of overlap, with a total of twenty
communities targeted in the Northern Territory, all of which had a
population upward of 300. The decision not to direct the new funding to
smaller communities and outstations was that the transport links between
the ‘hub’ target towns and the smaller communities in their sphere of
influence would be upgraded, with a view to encouraging and assisting
residents of these smaller communities to utilize the hub services.

New houses were built on the proviso that the prioritized communities
signed a lease, ensuring that the Commonwealth had responsibilities for
housing in Aboriginal communities. The lease arrangements were part of
government’s secure tenure policy, and allowed all community houses to
choose to transfer to a public housing model. Meanwhile, other remote
Indigenous Communities not classified as priority/growth towns or
outstations continued to receive funding targeted towards specific
services such as local government municipal services (power, water,
waste management, roads), health clinics, schools, and police stations.
They would also later be asked for a lease, so that their houses could
be renovated, upgraded or rebuilt (for houses deemed inhabitable[^28]).
Outstations continued to receive general-purpose infrastructure and
service funding through a network of outstation resource agencies and
shire/regional councils, which were in turn funded by the Northern
Territory government. In 2014-15, 423[^29] were funded under the
Northern Territory government’s homeland programs for housing and
municipal and essential services. The Northern Territory government
asserted that the funding provided was making a contribution to living
in the outstations, recognizing that funding was insufficient to meet
all the service and infrastructure needs of residents. There were no new
houses for outstations, and the previous ATSIC moratorium of new
outstations remains in place.

While the significant increase in funding was welcomed by large
communities that were categorized as priority communities, the policy
created uncertainty in funding, programs and service delivery
arrangements with respect to the great many communities that were not
captured in the priority/growth town policies. There was also evidence
within the COAG documents that governments were trying to encourage
people into larger settlements, a policy shift that came to be known as
‘mainstreaming’. As Moran articulated at the time, such policies of
coercing people did not fit well historically as a development policy
for remote Indigenous communities.[^30]

The policy effectively established a hierarchy of communities in terms
of what should be developed and sustained. For some, the issue was one
of unequal access to basic services, shelter and support that should be
considered an entitlement for all citizens ‘that should not be
contingent on geographic location, at least in any policy sense’.[^31]
The mainstreaming approach was also ‘premised on utilizing standardized
structures and processes for delivering and managing’ housing and
infrastructure that did not take into account the particular nuances of
outstation needs.[^32]

Further, Sanders analyzed the populations that would be serviced under
the growth towns policy, demonstrating that there was a significant gap
for central Australia regions in particular, where at best only 18 per
cent of the population were likely to be captured within the ‘hub and
spoke’ of the twenty priority communities.[^33] Even with the best
transportation options between these large communities and their
surrounding smaller communities, there was a significant lack of service
coverage for many communities.

We observed at the time that communications policy and Indigenous policy
were largely disconnected from each other.[^34] The one exception is
education, in that schools in Indigenous communities do have internet
access, and have been the beneficiaries of various ICT programs in
recent decades, as discussed in Chapter 6. At the local level –
regardless of policy – communications and other infrastructures,
including housing and power, are dependent on each other.

### Houses and Community Infrastructure 

The average house in a remote Indigenous community will have a lifecycle
of four to eight years, will use about a third of the power of a
suburban home, is six times more likely to be overcrowded than other
Australian houses, and will have three times more dogs.[^35] In 2014,
CAT undertook a survey at the Utopia Homelands as part of a \$4million
commitment by the Commonwealth Government to improve living conditions.
In that report, Grey-Gardner and Young observe that residents preferred
box air-conditioners over more robust models, because some families
lived between three or four houses, taking the aircon with them.[^36]
Such observations are typical in reports by CAT, an organization that
takes into account the social life of infrastructure and objects in its
development and maintenance projects. The physicality of the outstation
house, its occupants and uses, were thus also integral to understanding
‘home internet’. We carefully documented the use of computers and
internet in relation to household dynamics and other community
infrastructures and utilities.

On our second visit to one community, the residents of three separate
houses were living under one roof. The taps were not working in one
house, and there was no power in the other (perhaps a decision to
economize on power bills rather than a power fault). The elderly couple
that usually occupied the house on their own told us they were
considering moving to a ‘humpy or tent’ because the house was so
crowded. A few months later they had moved into a caravan, given to them
by the Church.

As they were inundated with family members, they thought it unwise to
have a computer in the house as it would mean people would spend more
time indoors. In other instances, we observed that overcrowding was
temporary, until another house was repaired. As discussed in Chapter 4,
residents moved into different houses over the course of the project.

From the start we were made aware of the issue of power usage, which
seemed something of a deterrent for some residents in their decision
whether to have a computer. Each community had a different arrangement
for utilities. Mungalawarru has solar power with a back-up generator,
and water is supplied via a bore on the land trust. The community houses
and shed in Kwale Kwale are serviced by mains power and water supply
from Power and Water, except for one outlying house in the settlement
with solar power. Imangara has a generator for power supply, shared with
the pastoral station and school, and water is supplied from a nearby
bore on the pastoral station.

Power bills for all purposes at Kwale Kwale and Imangara were a
significant expense at around \$50 a month (higher during winter). To
receive power, residents need to purchase a power card from a store and
insert it into a meter. They were thus very aware of their power usage,
telling us that they were conscious not to use too many appliances. Some
were concerned that having a computer would significantly increase their
power costs. As it turned out, power became more of an issue when
computers were located in shared spaces, as people did not necessarily
contribute to purchasing ongoing power cards for these buildings.

We delve further into the dynamics of housing, bills and other
infrastructure issues in Part Two of this book. These were to become
important for understanding household decision-making in relation to the
internet, and revealed how the physical circumstances that have marred
remote communications from the start continue to manifest at the level
of everyday contemporary household routines, inconveniences and
capacities. We conclude this chapter with a brief description of each of
the communities.

### Kwale Kwale

Kwale Kwale is a small family outstation situated on the Iwupataka
Aboriginal Land Trust, approximately 40 kilometers west of Alice
Springs. The community is nestled near the foot of the MacDonnell Ranges
(an area known as Tjoritja to its Traditional Owners) in rugged and
varied desert landscape. Kwale Kwale is one of twelve or so family
homelands across the land trust, residents of which descend from four
main family groups. Most residents speak Western Arrernte and Luritja.
Kwale Kwale has twelve to fifteen permanent residents, with the majority
of these descending from one family group. When we first started
visiting the outstation, it was also populated by scores of peacocks,
kept as pets by the senior women. The free-roaming menagerie had
successfully intimidated the local dogs into submission.

The outstation has six houses (not including an old burnt-out house) and
a large shed with concrete floors and a veranda, with the indoor space
divided into three rooms. One room of the shed was being used as a
chapel during this period; the others for various purposes.

Two of the remaining houses stand at a distance from the others, and
were occupied by residents not related to the family. One was being used
as a youth respite service for troubled youths, run by an older
Aboriginal man. The program was taking on youth with law and justice
problems, and providing rehabilitation for them away from town. A single
Aboriginal man, who was employed in town but enjoyed living remotely,
occupied the other house.

### Imangara

Imangara is 207 kilometers by road south east of Tennant Creek, 30
kilometers past Ali Curung. The community has a permanent residency of
around eighty residents, who are primarily descendants of five main
family groups from the region. The residents mostly speak Alyawarr, but
also Kaytetye. The community has eleven houses and three sheds, which
are permanently occupied by family groups. As discussed below, there are
also other community facilities, including a women’s center and a
school.

Imangara is a CLA located on the Murray Downs pastoral station. When
land rights were granted, those whose country was being used by others
for agricultural purposes were left out. CLAs were designed to overcome
that by excising land from pastoral leases so that the traditional
owners might live there. The Imangara excision was granted in 1979 in
recognition of the close ties that a number of Alyawarr families have
with the surrounding country. The fenced living area is 84.72 hectares,
located 2 kilometers east of Murray Downs homestead. Over the years that
we visited, Imangara cycled through hard times and good times. Dwellings
were abandoned, and then later some old houses were repaired and new
ones built. Grasses would grow dangerously high at times, and be
susceptible to fires. Personal tragedies gutted what had seemed a
cohesive township, followed by what seemed a spike in religious
activities such as gospel music and church services.

### Mungalawurru

The Mungalawurru community lies approximately 80 kilometers from Tennant
Creek on the Karlantijpa North Aboriginal Land Trust (ALT), along with
the homelands of Napagunpa, Blue Bush, Kumunu and Kalumpurlpa, which are
all to the north of Mungalawurru. The land trust was established in the
1980s. To the south of Mungalawurru is Karlantijpa South ALT, west is
Central Desert ALT, and to the east Phillip Creek pastoral station and
the old Warrego gold mine site. Mungalawurru lies on a flat plain in
spinifex country. A few trees have been planted for shelter at one end
of the community, but otherwise the outstation is exposed to high winds
and hot sun. At times, blue-green puddles appeared on the road into
Mungalawurru, formed from sulphur used to neutralize cyanide from the
tailings dam. The road into the community is bitumen for two-thirds of
the drive, but the last third regularly became inaccessible in the rain.
We were forced to turn back on occasion, and the residents told us of
having to walk that 30 kilometers to the bitumen when they got cut off.

The community has close ties with other homelands on the land trust and
the land trust to the south, with many family members residing in
Tennant Creek, Mungkarta and Ali Curung. The residents primarily speak
Warlmanpa, but also Warumungu and Warlpiri. Mungalawurru is officially
home to approximately twenty-two permanent residents.

The Mungalawurru community residents have a close association with
Phillip Creek pastoral station and Warrego mine, which ceased production
in 1989. Many senior residents were students at the Warrego Mine School
before the mine closed down. Now the family’s school-aged children
reside in Tennant Creek.

The community has five occupied houses and twelve tin sheds, some of
which are used as houses and others as community facilities, including
an art shed and a health clinic.

### Conclusion

Indigenous social policy and communications policy have particular
histories and objectives, and have at times been contradictory in their
treatment of remoteness, including the viability of remote living, and
government’s responsibility to provide infrastructure to all
Australians. As the Australian Commonwealth moves towards a ‘digital by
default’ strategy of service provision, the issue of how those living in
remote Australia will access services online becomes more critical. In
the next chapter, we take a closer look at the notion of the digital
divide and discuss the practical aspects of bringing internet to the
outstations.

## Chapter 2: Infrastructure 

When we first visited the three outstations, only one house out of
twenty-four had an internet connection. A man at Kwale Kwale who was
living on the community with the permission of the traditional owners
had figured out that he could receive a tolerable mobile broadband
signal 40 kilometers from Alice Springs by taping a 3G stick modem to a
pole on his roof, connected to his computer by a long ethernet cable.
His house was located a kilometer from the main cluster of houses, and
his solution had gone unnoticed by others at Kwale Kwale, as he did not
interact much with the family. Four years later, fifteen households in
the three communities had home internet connections, received via
domestic satellite dishes planted on the rooves of their houses. The
residents were paying for the internet through a retail service provider
under standard contracts. We had assisted them to sign up for the
services, but the decision to acquire the services was entirely their
own.

This chapter describes the decisions and steps that led to residents
accessing the internet at the outstations, and how these efforts fitted
within our research approach. We discuss the reasons for using a trial
approach to understanding a digital divide problem, and how the process
of providing computers and internet enabled us to test some policy
assumptions around the most effective or most culturally-appropriate
forms of access. Although on the surface our approach resembles previous
studies that have occurred in the area of information and communications
technology (ICT) for development, we explain how our motivations and
actions differed somewhat from that particular field of research. In the
second half of the chapter, we provide a plain-language account of some
of the technical components of the project.[^37] Our interest in, and
documentation of, the material aspects of the hardware, as well as our
own interactions with the internet service providers, yielded important
insights into how infrastructure can frame social relations and
influence people’s digital choices.

### The Digital Divide

As discussed in the introduction, we set out to examine a digital divide
problem, in that we were interested in understanding what benefits, if
any, digital resources confer on individuals and groups, and whether
those who are *not* making use of them are disadvantaged as a result.
The term ‘digital divide’ has fallen in and out of favor amongst media
studies researchers since it first emerged in public discourse during
the 1990s. These debates are helpful in understanding the limits of
research on internet adoption and use, and informed how we carried out
our work.

The digital divide was first used as a measure of how the ‘Information
Society’ was progressing within and between nation states. Countries
began to measure computer and internet ownership as an indicator of
knowledge economy growth and competitive advantage. These exhaustive
statistical studies were based on a tradition of work on telephone
penetration, such as that developed by the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration (NTIA) in the United States, and the
emphasis on hardware and network reach was carried over to the analysis
of the social distribution of the internet. The NTIA positioned the
digital divide as physical access to computers by measuring the number
of households and individuals with a computer and internet connection,
and in 2002 declared the divide was largely overcome—‘we are truly a
nation online’—with the internet being used at work, schools, and
libraries as well as at home by over half of the American population,
and rising by two million new users a month.[^38]

However, by the early 2000s, a wave of scholarly attention had emerged
that refuted simplistic notions of the divide as referring to physical
access to computers. The ‘either you have access to ICT or you do not,
you are either connected or you are not’ approach, it was argued,
assumed that with enough resources and political will, the divide was
easy to close or bridge.[^39] Even with computers, some people did not
have the necessary skills or motivation to make use of them to the same
degree as others.[^40] Skills, autonomy of use (including where access
occurred), attitudes towards technology (relevance), and types of use
therefore became the main themes of digital divide research. The
refocused concern for the social dimensions of usage was considered ‘a
more elaborate and realistic understanding of inequalities in the
information age’.[^41]

Analyses of data sets drawn from many different countries have revealed
strong correlations between socio-economic status and internet adoption.
Some theorists have argued that as social disadvantages, such as low
income and lack of education, appear to be linked to the digital divide,
the divide can only be addressed by tackling those apparent causes –
effectively rendering the concept redundant, or at least unexceptional
as a singular policy concern.[^42] However, as Helsper notes, ‘there
remains significant debate around the existence, nature and causality of
these links’, a question we address directly in Chapter 9.[^43]

The most recent research on the digital divide seeks to know whether
internet use produces tangible outcomes, and whether unequal
distribution in the ways that people use the internet is reinforcing
existing inequalities. These studies are asking who benefits most from
being online in terms of economic, cultural, social and personal
wellbeing, and how this links to skills and online engagement.[^44]
Researching tangible outcomes requires establishing a hierarchy in the
nature or quality of use and mapping the opportunities people choose to
take up.[^45] For instance, online resources, such as being able to look
at job classifieds online, can translate into being able to find a job
through access to more opportunities. Studies of how people enact online
opportunities tend to support what is known as the *Matthew effect*,
whereby the rich get richer, or the *knowledge gap hypothesis*, which
posits that those with more resources gain skills and technologies
before others, thus reaping advantages sooner and increasing rather than
decreasing knowledge gaps in society.[^46] Van Duersen and van Dijk
found that in the Netherlands, where internet adoption is
near-ubiquitous (96 per cent of the population), capital-enhancing
online opportunities are more likely to be taken up by those with higher
education and income ‘which would accordingly reinforce their already
strong positions in society’.[^47] However, some groups defy prediction,
displaying high levels of digital inclusion despite experiencing other
disadvantages.[^48] As part of our research in the outstations, we
routinely asked people questions about their internet use, as well as
what they would like to learn to do in order to understand how the
residents responded to the opportunities of being online. Determining
whether Indigenous Australians living in remote areas were making
different choices from other Australians, and why, was one of the
central questions we set out to answer.

In attempting to research the digital divide in remote Aboriginal
communities, we were presented with some unique challenges. Many people
in remote communities had never used the internet when we commenced
(including the majority of adults in the three communities). While other
studies have moved on from basic questions of use versus non-use, this
was clearly still important to our research. Moreover, although most
countries possess longitudinal data on internet adoption and use that
enable statisticians to draw correlations between internet access and
other forms of social inclusion, as explained below, remote Indigenous
populations have been left out of many Australian data sets. We also had
serious doubts as to whether the questions being asked of other
population groups would tell us much about the dynamics of the digital
divide in remote Australia, given that unique factors were in play,
including cultural norms, extreme environmental conditions, and a
different range of opportunities. Therefore, although we undertook a
standard line of questioning around people’s online engagement, their
attitudes towards technologies and their skills, we set out to examine
these in relation to daily life in remote communities.

### Researching the Digital Divide in Remote Australia

Digital inclusion research has mostly been conducted through sample
surveys, such as the World Internet Project.[^49] These studies show
that although the digital divide in Australia is narrowing, it is doing
so increasingly slowly.[^50] However, sample surveys of internet use in
Australia have bypassed remote Aboriginal communities due to the
obstacles posed by lack of landlines (generally used to administer
surveys), as well as language and cultural barriers. There is also no
current data on ICT infrastructures in remote communities, which
prevented us from providing an in-depth analysis of adoption in relation
to different kinds of internet programs and services nationwide (see
Chapter 9 for an analysis of mobile adoption in the central Australia
region). Although ICT infrastructure was included in the Community
Housing and Infrastructure Needs Survey (CHINS), the last CHINS
collection occurred in 2006, and the survey has since been
discontinued.[^51] A key report on internet in remote communities
produced by the Australian Communications and Media Authority (the
communications regulator), published in 2008, relied heavily on this
data. Telstra’s Telecommunications Action Plan for Remote Indigenous
Communities (TAPRIC) data (see Chapter 1) is not publicly available.

For this reason, we restricted our analysis of available statistics to
the central Australian region, where we were able to determine available
infrastructure through our networks. As described in Chapter 9, the
census provides a limited amount of information related to the internet.
However, we gained insight into variations in adoption by examining how
2011 census data on households’ internet connections corresponded to our
own knowledge of types of internet available.

As so little research had been conducted on internet adoption and use in
central Australia, we were conscious that measures typically used to
gauge ‘high versus low order’ internet use would not necessarily apply.
Determining whether the internet was used for job searches, for
instance, says little about digital inclusion when there are no jobs
nearby (or where employers are not using the internet to promote those
jobs that are available). Understanding the tangible outcomes of
internet use thus required significant engagement with communities to
understand their particular circumstances and priorities, which we
undertook across a four-year time-frame. As Correa and Pavez note in
their study of first encounters with the internet in remote
(non-Indigenous) communities in Chile, ‘geographic isolation makes the
social context more decisive in any action or decision’, and digital
inclusion is a process that involves ‘multiple dimensions such as
technological access, skills, different uses, social contexts and
support’.[^52]

Tim Rowse has observed that, when used in policy contexts, statistics
can create a ‘regime of truth’ that overrides the lived realities and
dynamics of remote communities.[^53] Economist Amartya Sen makes a
similar point in relation to social exclusion.[^54] Exclusion, he
argues, needs to be understood in terms of the causal process, which
requires an understanding of the social context. Sen’s capabilities
approach is a useful framework for considering the digital divide, as it
asks what substantive freedoms people possess given the constraints
placed upon them, and about their ability to enact the outcomes that
they value.[^55] We found that particular deprivations can be difficult
to understand when encountering individuals in remote communities when
no background information is available. For instance, on an early visit,
we asked a man if he was living in the community, and whether he was
interested in having the internet in his house. He replied that he did
not have a house and was living in the ‘windbreak’ – a makeshift shelter
of branches and found objects in someone else’s yard. Whether the man
was permanently living an itinerant lifestyle – having fallen through
the cracks of welfare and housing – or whether his circumstances were
the result of the ‘temporary mobility’ discussed in Chapter 4, changes
the meaning, duration and consequences of what we might consider to be a
hardship. Putting up with inadequate shelter because of a willing
decision to visit relatives is different to not being able to afford
accommodation, or being excluded from a public housing register. As Sen
writes, ‘The issue, ultimately, is what freedom does a person have –
everything considered. It should come as no surprise that a person’s
deprivation can have diverse origins and may take disparate forms’.[^56]

For Rowse, the appropriate unit of analysis is not comparison between
statistically-identifiable groups, but an understanding of how a group
of people in a particular place is ‘doing well or doing badly in ways
that are specific to region and cultural heritage’.[^57] Although we
were not able to conduct a nationwide investigation of internet in
remote communities, in conducting our qualitative research on the three
outstations (complemented by two case study investigations in two larger
towns), we were able to understand better what digital exclusion means
in relation to the specific circumstances of remote community life and
individual agency.

### Trials and Experiments

Neither can standard statistical approaches tell us about the
effectiveness of particular interventions. A different approach to
digital divide studies has been to provide ICT infrastructure where
there is none, and to measure the outcomes. The benefit of trials is
that they can produce insights into how a technology or system fares
within a social context. The small-scale intervention that we designed
was intended to examine a specific policy position, in that shared
internet facilities were presumed to be the most viable and appropriate,
and yet there was no evidence to support one form of internet access
over another (see Chapter 1). Moreover, only communities with a
population of over 300 people were eligible to apply for funding for
shared facilities at the time. By implementing our alternative policy
approach, we set out to understand whether shared facilities were the
most desirable and practical solution, and what might work in their
absence. If personal ownership and acquisition were possible, then
understanding what level of assistance and maintenance (if any) was
necessary could assist Indigenous organizations to develop their own
programs.

A small-scale trial of the kind that we embarked upon cannot be used to
make reliable predictions, as the results are specific to the time,
place and people involved. However, qualitative research of this kind
has the advantage of showing *why* a particular approach works, and of
providing insight into complex social dynamics. In the field of
education technology, some studies have attempted experimental research
using randomized controlled trials, whereby the intervention is applied
to a statistically-significant group, selected randomly, and compared to
a non-treatment group.[^58] Such approaches seek to show definitively if
an intervention works, and can provide strong evidence that can be used
to support and justify particular policy responses. Large randomized
controlled trials still require qualitative research in order to
understand how or why the particular outcome has occurred. While
valuable, the experimental approach is not usually practical when
working with Indigenous communities, where the processes of consent and
consultation can preclude random selection, and where projects need to
be adaptive to accommodate community concerns and needs.

The Home Internet Project trial involved three stages. The first
involved consultation with the outstations and a baseline study. On our
first visits to the communities in 2010, the Central Land Council (CLC)
and the Centre for Appropriate Technology (CAT) made initial contact and
consulted with community members, at which time the elders agreed to the
project. During our early meetings with the communities, we carefully
documented their prior use of ICTs, and tried to ascertain what they
perceived to be the barriers to ICT uptake, and the opportunities
available through having computers and internet access (see below).[^59]
In the second phase, from 2011, we monitored the issues as they
unfolded, and carried out research in two larger communities in order to
compare home internet with other types of access. CAT provided a total
of twenty computers and associated satellite services connecting all
computers to the internet in Kwale Kwale (four), Mungalawurru (five) and
Imangara (eleven)[^60]. Aside from the research fieldtrips, CAT
researchers also carried out regular ICT training and maintenance
support in the communities for two years from the commissioning of the
facilities. In the mid-phase of the project, we extracted usage data
from a small number of computers (with the owners’ permission) to
confirm that the computers were in fact being used in the way we were
told. We also broke off into teams to conduct case studies in two larger
communities, one with a successful shared internet facility (Papunya),
and the other with mobile coverage (Ali Curung). The case studies proved
important in that they enabled us to compare home satellite internet
with other infrastructures. In the third phase, from the end of 2013, we
assisted the households to set up internet services (where desired), and
documented the transition. Participants were given the choice to
maintain internet access by paying for their own plans under a
government-subsidized program, the National Broadband Network (NBN)
Interim Satellite Solution (ISS). We continued to visit the communities
in 2014 in order to understand how the households were faring with their
own internet services. That final stage of the research, where
households decided whether to transition to the NBN and to maintain
their own services, was revealing, providing important insights into how
the government’s solution to providing internet to remote areas was
failing this particular group (see part III).

Much of our time during our research visits was spent traipsing from
house to house, checking up on the computers, providing people with
fresh paper, inks and accessories, as well as responding to requests for
on-the-spot training in ICT skills and applications. We became the
technical help – the IT support – performing mundane tasks to remove a
frustration and return things to normality. Those of us who were less IT
proficient were asked to help set up accounts, but we also learnt to
blow the red dust off a circuit board, and check for first principles
(cords plugged in, power supply on). These ad hoc house visits were as
informative for us as they were for the residents, giving us a snapshot
of how different individuals were learning how to use the computer, how
they maintained the computer, and what these factors might say about the
relative value of ICTs in the outstations.

Our research approach thus involved a degree of ethnographic
observation, but accrued through short visits of a day or two duration
every six weeks or so in each community. CAT and CLC had a great deal of
background knowledge of the families and communities, and received
information through their extensive networks of events that occurred
during the trial period. Such information was useful in helping us to
avoid intruding on the communities during difficult or inconvenient
times, although sometimes our information networks failed us (the worst
example being when we showed up the same day a coffin was delivered).
The following chapters draw on such information, but this book should
not be taken as a full anthropological account of these communities; nor
do we think such an approach was necessary. As the project progressed,
we became increasingly aware that a less-intrusive approach was
sufficient, and perhaps preferable, for understanding the digital
divide, partly as it was easiest to discuss computers in our roles as
helpers.

### ICT for Development

On the surface, our approach resembled what is known as ICT for
development (ICT4D), in that we were introducing a technology to a
population that was largely going without. Although the findings and
critique of ICT4D is useful in considering the dynamics and outcomes of
our work, we do not locate our approach in this field of research.
Instead, the trial occurred in what we see as a trajectory of media and
communications projects initiated in remote communities through
Indigenous organizations in collaboration with researchers.

Development communications (or ‘communications for development’ or
‘development for social change’) has a long history that we do not have
space to recount here.[^61] The practice of development communications
generally involves an external agency operating within a situation of
need, where this role cannot be performed by the community, or by the
government agencies charged with serving it. These projects are based on
the rationale that communications technology is integral to social and
material advancement in order to facilitate the exchange of ideas in a
well-functioning society, and to overcome inequities in access to
information. Development communications has been widely critiqued for
overlooking the inherently social aspects of communication technology,
and for assuming that technical and administrative solutions can
overcome structural and political inequalities.

ICT4D is a variant on development communication, in that it moves away
from development as merely an outside aid program, to something that
could be entrepreneurial and work in harmony with corporate and national
economic aspirations.[^62] ICT4D has a tendency to assume that ICT is
inherently ‘meta-enabling technology that will bypass all institutional
and infrastructural obstacles’, providing unlimited opportunities for
social and economic development.[^63] Those at the ‘bottom of the
pyramid’ are assisted to improve their circumstances through online
engagement and enterprise. Early iterations of ICT4D argued in favor of
shared facilities, which were considered to ‘take advantage of economies
of scope’, as they aggregated demand across an entire community, ‘thus
reducing costs, while increasing traffic and helping to integrate the
facility into the social fabric of the community’.[^64]

Faye Ginsburg has critiqued the ‘neo-developmental’ logic of the digital
divide framework generally, arguing that Indigenous peoples in
particular are often depicted as ‘waiting, endlessly, to catch up to the
privileged West’ on the technological front.[^65] Traditional peoples
are thus treated as existing in a separate time, not just place, from
the mainstream. As Mazarella points out, the ‘insistence that computers
come later’ perpetuates the assumption that technology should be
evaluated in terms of a hierarchy of needs that can be known in
advance.[^66] He asks, ‘What if the power of a medium is as much
performative as it is functional – that is to say, what if it brings
about its effects as much through the desires people invest in it as
through its ability to deliver predefined utilities?’[^67]

Mazarella’s question is important. As explored in Chapter 1, overcoming
Indigenous disadvantage has been a contentious and highly-politicized
field in recent years. The digital divide can appear as a minor concern
in contrast to pressing disparities in health and education, or housing
needs. However, the possibilities and outcomes of communication
technologies are less easy to anticipate and to measure.

We did not see our project as an ICT4D project because we were working
with and through Indigenous organizations with long track records in
service delivery and infrastructure. CAT in particular performs a
watchdog function, starting from a research perspective of determining
what works and why before providing services. In the years preceding our
project, CAT had been directly involved in government community ICT
initiatives, including the development and implementation of an
alternative community phone project that provided over 250 pay phones to
remote communities. The phone operated with pre-paid cards, and was
built from the electronic components of readily-available domestic
Telstra phones to enable cheap and easy replacement, encased in a
stainless steel shell that protected it from damage.[^68] The CAT phone
became known as the ‘NED phone’ due to its likeness to Ned Kelly’s
armour.[^69] During the period within which the home internet trial took
place, other Indigenous organizations, including the Indigenous Remote
Communications Association and its member groups, were striving to bring
their board members into the NBN debate, and building knowledge and
alliances within communities.

Government agencies that serve remote communities are not necessarily
incentivized to commit to small-scale initiatives, particularly trials
where the outcome is unknown (the APN community phones WiFi project
being an exception). The history of communications in remote Indigenous
Australia reflects this, whereby many innovations have occurred
‘pre-policy’ and in an ad hoc fashion through the efforts of the
Indigenous sector, including broadcast infrastructure, screen and radio
production, high-frequency (two-way) radio networks, satellite
television and videoconferencing. Indigenous-owned organizations,
together with local leaders, have carried out these experiments, aided
(and in some cases generated) by non-Indigenous workers from the
education and media sectors. The enterprises and infrastructures of
remote media and communication have thus arisen from two cultural
traditions operating together within the one settler state.[^70] This is
not to say that our presence in the communities was unproblematic – for
us or the residents – but only to recognize, as Melinda Hinkson writes,
that the sometimes-uneasy coming together of two traditions is the
ground upon which the Indigenous communications industry has been
built.[^71]

### Prior Experience with the Internet

What was the nature of internet access when we began? There were six
computers to be found across the three communities when we started,
including the one house with an internet connection mentioned at the
opening of this chapter. Not all of the computers belonged to those
residing in the communities – at least two were on loan or gifted from
people outside of the community. In our early conversations with
forty-eight of the residents (about 50 per cent of the adult population
of the three communities combined), we learnt that over half had used a
computer at some point in the past. However, only two-thirds of those
who had used a computer had also used the internet, and three-quarters
of internet uses were aged 30 or under. Those in the 30-45 age bracket
were most likely to have used a computer, but not the internet.

Although none of the communities had mobile coverage, approximately 30
per cent of people we spoke to had purchased mobiles for use in town.
Some mobiles had been given to school-aged relatives who were staying in
town, so that the children could ring the community payphone when they
needed to contact home. A third of mobile owners were aware of, or
using, their mobile for internet access – mostly for music downloads
and/or chat – which amounted to 10 per cent of everyone we spoke to. One
woman had accessed the internet on a mobile phone, but had never
accessed the internet from a computer. She was to become one of the most
frequent users of the internet.

Approximately one-third of those without a computer said that either
they didn’t know how to use it, or had never considered getting one.
This last group generally had very little knowledge of what a computer
could be used for, and some older people asked us to explain what we
meant by the words ‘computer’, ‘laptop’ and ‘internet’ – questions that
left us stammering for non-technical descriptions. One man had seen
twitter feeds on television programs, and grasped that it enabled people
to participate in conversations, but wanted to know how that worked.

As discussed in later chapters, there was significant interest in
getting computers, primarily for kids schooling, entertainment, and for
some cultural and enterprise activities. However, there were also
significant doubts around affordability, the security of the equipment
and language barriers.[^72] As the few individuals who owned a computer,
or had owned one in the past, were conscious of who they allowed to use
the computer, these computers were not necessarily available to others.
One young man kept his laptop locked away when he was not using it.
Having only a small number of computers in a community also created
annoyances for owners, mostly from others who wanted ‘to put songs on
their mp3 players’. A woman who owned a laptop was protective of it,
telling us that ‘people want to use it but I tell them no because they
might spoil it’. These conversations suggested that there was not a
critical mass of computers in the community for everyone to experience
computer use, and those that did exist were coveted possessions. In the
following chapter we explore how these dynamics of ownership changed
after the computers arrived.

It is important to consider that the residents had been living with
inadequate telecommunications, and that this perhaps influenced their
attitude to acquiring their own internet services. Out of the three
communities, only two homes had active telephone lines, both in the same
community (Kwale Kwale), and both in the homes of older people. One of
these phones had restrictions on it; they could receive calls but could
not make any charged calls, except by using a pre-paid phone card. Both
phones were initially installed to enable contact with medical services.
Imangara and Mungalawurru both had a single public payphone in an
outdoor cabinet. The distance to houses at the other end of the
community was up to 400 metres. Three older people in Imangara expressed
a desire for a home telephone: ‘\[We\] would like telephones. The one
here breaks a lot. I need a phone to ring family and friends in other
places’, an older woman told us. The older residents had limited
knowledge of what services they were entitled to, or what was available
for purchase. When asked how they would go about getting a telephone,
none was able to provide a straightforward answer. One woman said she
didn’t have a home phone because she ‘hadn’t been given one’. Others
said they would contact the council in the first instance, rather than a
telecommunications company. The elders in Imangara said that they would
like at least one public phone for each cluster of houses (‘camp’), as
it was too far to get to the telephone if someone was calling.

The attitude of waiting for external authorities to provide telephones
is unsurprising, given the way in which Australia’s USO has been
delivered, whereby consumers are entitled to services but must cover the
cabling costs themselves – costs that are beyond households or even
whole communities (Chapter 1). Satellite internet, however, was heavily
subsidized at the time, including installation costs. That households
had not sought out satellite internet, despite this being far more
affordable than home telephones, seemed peculiar to us – until we began
the process of installing satellite internet ourselves.

### Connecting to the Internet

Infrastructure is relational, in that different actors can have a very
different experience of it, whereby one person’s infrastructure is
another’s obstacle. Sandvig gives the example of a staircase, which is a
means of passage for most, but a barrier for someone in a
wheelchair.[^73] Moreover, infrastructure is not just the hardware and
technicalities, but also the rules, pricing and players that determine
who gets to use it. Communications infrastructure is thus tied up in
human experience, and evolves through planning, regulation, markets and
the networks between them. We began to examine closely who was
benefitting from communications infrastructure in remote communities, as
well as who was left out. The behavior of the infrastructure providers
when we began to install internet services was particularly
illuminating.

In early 2011, about a year after our initial meetings with the three
communities, installation began. During our initial scoping of the
project, we made the decision to provide internet in the most
cost-effective way, on the principle that whatever system we installed
would be the most affordable for the communities should they choose to
continue to keep the internet when the funding ran out.[^74]
Unfortunately, our low-cost model meant that we were providing limited
download capacity and speeds, but we felt that this was better than
providing the communities with services that would be expensive for them
to maintain at the conclusion of the project. The model we implemented
thus involved using as few satellite dishes as possible, with
point-to-multipoint point wireless transceiver links to other houses.
Each household that chose to have a computer and internet connection
made that decision with the full knowledge that they would be actively
participating in the study.

We set up the accounts using the Commonwealth government’s now obsolete
Australian Broadband Guarantee (ABG) scheme, which provided subsidized
internet to households in remote areas (see Chapter 1). CAT acted as
facilitator for the households (or, more precisely, the individuals
representing them), whose actual names would be on the application and
account for the service.

Although the ABG scheme subsidized provision of satellite broadband to
remote areas, connecting computers to these services was not
straightforward, but involved a long sequence of steps. Customers had to
determine via an online map which registered ISPs operated in their area
(or call the government department if internet access was not possible –
a likely scenario); register their details online; confirm their
permanent residency and the permanency of the building itself; contact
one or more of the ISPs to obtain and compare service offerings; and
forward the signed declaration form and their contract application to
apply for the service. For customers in very remote areas, the ISP would
then typically apply to the government department for approval for an
additional subsidy. Assuming the customer had arranged for a continuous
240-volt power supply, installation could then commence (notwithstanding
what could be several changes to the installation schedule due to
weather conditions affecting roads). Once the service was installed,
normal billing processes would ensue.

This series of actions is reasonably straightforward if the customer is
readily contactable by phone, has a good grasp of English and has
sufficient knowledge about broadband services to be able to make an
informed choice of service plan. However, the process can be
particularly trying for remote community residents who do not meet all
these criteria, and whose only external communications option is a
single payphone. Organizing the connections from the relative
convenience and comfort of CAT’s Alice Springs office took co-author
Andrew thirty phone calls. CAT was also quoted \$1,100 to have an
additional power point installed in a shed already serviced with power.
It was little wonder that no households had organized satellite internet
services.

The computer equipment supplier visited the communities with CAT to get
an idea of their layout and the dimensions and conditions of the
buildings, in order to design arrangements for the WiFi directional
antenna equipment. A separate company from Mt Isa, a sub-contractor to
the ISP, installed the internet satellite facilities the following month
with CAT’s assistance. Each installation only took several hours; the
sub-contractor’s visits to Mungalawarru and Imangara formed only one
stop on their three-week timetable, covering about 10,000km and
traversing western Queensland, northern South Australia and central and
southern Northern Territory. We decided that point-to-multipoint
wireless was a more cost-effective choice for connecting the computers
to the satellite internet services, because installing cable would also
have involved digging trenches between all the houses. Additionally, if
a house was rebuilt or added (and housing works did occur at Imangara in
the last year of the project), more cabling and trenches would be
needed.

In choosing an ISP, we took into account the suitability of the
available plans, especially the need for one with a high-speed quota,
because there would be several computers sharing the service. The
service we chose was also ‘shaped’ to ensure that once the monthly quota
was used up, there would be slow-speed residual access to the internet,
but no additional charges would accrue.[^75] By shaping the services, we
avoided a situation where one or more computers might monopolize the
internet quota by spreading the overall usage over the full billing
month period, preventing the quota being used up prematurely. However,
the low download capacity and speeds undoubtedly influenced the use of
the computers.

We began the installation process at Kwale Kwale, because it was closest
to Alice Springs (where CAT, the partner most involved in this stage,
was located), and therefore easier to roadtest the process and any
issues that might arise. We chose the large shed near the community’s
central core of three houses for the satellite dish and service, because
it had mains power, allowed direct connection to two of the four new
computers, and had a better (though not ideal) line of sight profile to
the other two houses for local WiFi radio connection. Locating the dish
in the shed later proved to be a problem, as it required that the
community maintain a power supply to the equipment by replenishing
pre-paid power cards as needed. Although households were prepared to do
this when the dish was co-located with other household appliances, the
same commitment did not stretch to a shared space, and the connection
would fail due to lack of power.

At Imangara, we had two satellite services installed, so that the level
of internet capacity at this larger community would be similar to that
available at the two smaller outstations. Originally, two senior
residents agreed to be the custodians for these services, so the dishes
were to be placed on their respective houses. However, one decided to
move to Tennant Creek to support his grandchildren, who were attending
school there, and the service intended for his house was moved instead
to the Women’s Centre, the other most viable option. This change of
arrangements took some time to confirm with the ABG staff, and was only
approved a short time before the installers visited the community. The
degree of mobility amongst remote-community people and the amount of
time this change took to process with the ABG group was early evidence
of the difficulties associated with subsidized satellite internet
programs in remote communities. Movement between houses, and to and from
community, was to become a significant factor that influenced people’s
access to the internet. As recounted in Part III, issues with providers
persisted when the households moved to the NBN interim satellite service
scheme in 2013.

### Computer Choices

The second level of infrastructure concerns involved whether the
households might want laptops or desktops, a decision that we believed
might be important in terms of residents’ mobility. On an early visit to
Imangara, we found a discarded laptop on the back of a trailer, which
was missing a keyboard. After observing this, we pointed out to the
residents that desktop computers were tougher, the screens and keyboards
were larger and easier to use, that desktop computers were also more
likely to stay in one place, and that the individual parts (keyboard,
monitor, mouse) could be replaced. Laptops, we said, were a good idea if
they expected to be moving to and from their community on a regular
basis. After weighing up the information we gave them, most community
members chose desktop computers rather than laptops. Along with
computers, we supplied printers, inks and paper, and accessories such as
mice, cables, headsets, speakers, keyboards, power boards and spare
monitors. People wanted to be able to print pictures and photos in color
from the computers, so we provided gel-based, inkjet color printers,
because they were cheaper at an entry level and at cost of printing per
sheet, and the ink was less likely than conventional inkjet printers to
dry out in extreme desert temperatures .

As we were interested in whether communal facilities were preferable to
home computers, we gave the communities the option to have some or all
of the computers in public spaces. Initially, people at the communities
weren’t sure whether they wanted individual computers in their houses,
or whether to share terminals. At Imangara, some senior women felt the
equipment would be safer in the only community building available, the
Women’s Centre. But by our next trip, most households preferred to have
their own computer. We put two more computers in the Women’s Centre, in
any case, for any residents who didn’t have computers in their homes,
and for use by the couple running the Women’s Centre. The use of these
computers is discussed further in the next chapter in relation to
ownership and sharing.

At Mungalawarru, residents came up with a mix of computers in four
houses, and two in what was known as the ‘CDEP Shed’—a building used for
the government’s Aboriginal work-for-the-dole scheme. People at
Mungalawarru were highly mobile, often shifting between their community,
Tennant Creek and other locations, and placing a couple of terminals in
a shed seemed like a good option, because more transitory community
members could use them. Two residents at Kwale Kwale chose to have a
home computer**,** but a senior couple was unsure about whether they
wanted one at home. Ultimately, the senior woman decided that the shed
was the best place, and we placed two of the four computers there for
them and their family members to use.

In total, we initially installed twenty computers: four at Kwale Kwale,
five at Mungalawurru and eleven at Imangara. Although only a few
computers ended up in public spaces such as sheds, as discussed in the
next chapter, tensions emerged around who got to use the communal
computers, who owned them or whether they were up for grabs. The
movement of the computers, and people’s claims over them, revealed to us
dynamics of Western and traditional notions of ownership that were
sometimes at odds (see Chapter 3 and Appendix 2).

The residents were concerned about protecting the equipment when they
were away from the house, or when they didn’t want kids using it.
Residents at Kwale Kwale first raised the idea of having lockable
computer and printer covers. CAT designed a computer cover with vents
around the top to allow heat generated by the equipment to disperse, as
well as a hasp that could be secured with a padlock. The Kwale Kwale
residents approved the cover, and it became the model for use in the
three communities. Tables with a robust metal frame were also provided
with each computer, and some of the residents and kids at a couple of
the communities helped paint the tables and covers.

When we first discussed with the residents the option of having a
computer, some told us they had no room for one. Some residents asked us
to build an extra room on their house for the computer, a suggestion we
politely refused. However, the issue of space did not turn out to be a
major problem for most households. We found the rooms in the larger
houses were sparse, possibly reflecting the fact that occupancy varied
often, and that individuals did not necessarily lay claim to particular
bedrooms.[^76] In most cases, the residents opted to place the computer
table in the most spacious room – the main living room at the front of
the house. A handful of residents decided to put the computer table in a
bedroom.

We documented movements of computers between houses in order to
understand the implications for home internet. If satellite internet was
organized at the household level, with a dish attached to the roof of
the dwelling, moving houses would have implications for individuals
accessing that internet connection. We developed the hypothesis that
community-wide broadband infrastructure – such as a shared WiFi network
that could be received at any dwelling – would be necessary, due to such
intra-community relocation. As mentioned, by the end of the project, a
number of households had chosen individual subscriptions over such an
arrangement, with those households having at least some family members
who could be considered permanent occupants.

### Detractors and the Fate of the Infrastructure 

When the project commenced, detractors said that the computers would
never last given the harsh environment, distance from repair outlets,
overcrowded spaces, and even dogs. Cultural factors to do with communal
sharing, mobility and ownership were also raised as likely obstacles to
home computing, meaning the computers would be given away or taken out
of the homes permanently. A station owner told us it was a ‘hare-brained
idea’ that would give community members another reason ‘to sit at home
and do nothing’. Essentially, the fact that very few households had
purchased computers and entered into internet subscriptions of their own
accord was seen as proof that home internet was, at best, not the
preferred means of access, and at worst, either inappropriate or
unviable.

The detractors were wrong, in that despite equipment failure, loss or
damage, an average of seventeen of the twenty computers installed by
early August 2011 were still operational by the end of the first year.
By the end of the project (twenty-five months since installation), two
computers had been lost or taken out of the community. For comparison, a
study of computers in offices conducted by an American commercial
research company revealed that three and a half computers would
typically fail in a twenty-five-month period (see Table 3 in Appendix 2
and Crouch 2014 for a full account).[^77]

Computer accessories, such as headsets, mice, keyboards, cover padlocks
and power boards did not fare as well, being comparatively vulnerable to
damage and removal. After the first few months of the project, computer
tables were rarely locked and items often disappeared, especially power
boards and external speakers, which could be used with other household
equipment. Not surprisingly, printers were the equipment to break down
most frequently, in some cases irreparably so, with an estimated service
lifetime of about two years in these communities. The build-up of dust
and grit inside printers, often caused by residents leaving the cover
off the paper feed, was a particular source of malfunction. We took one
broken printer back to Alice Springs to determine whether it could be
rescued, only to find a perfectly formed mouse nest made of shredded
paper nestled inside. By contrast, the network equipment (satellite
dish, modem, network switch, local area wireless transceiver equipment,
roof-mounted antenna and cabling) did not experience any hardware
failures; any network failures related to issues with the injector or
cabling within households.

Community members asked for technical support for a variety of matters,
such as equipment failures, corrupted applications, and password issues.
In one email, Andrew was told that one of the printers ‘needs pink, red,
blue, green, yellow, orange cartridges’. Only a few instances involved
problems that prevented the resident from using the computer entirely.
Sometimes another computer was available that they could use until
repairs took place. Printer problems were relatively frequent,
particularly later in the project, although some of these, such as paper
feed pick-up issues, usually required working surfaces to be cleaned
rather than needing tools, spare parts or software skills to be
resolved. Residents often did not attempt to fix these minor mechanical
issues themselves, possibly because they knew they could wait for the
next support visit to resolve the problem.

We concluded that the difficulties with organizing installation were a
far greater barrier to home internet than the maintenance and
replacement of equipment. Although replacements and repairs were needed,
the frequency of these events did not necessarily warrant a supervised
or publicly-maintained model of ICT access (such as a shared computer
room). We now turn to what happened once the computers arrived, and how
particular events impacted on computer use and ownership, including
travel, moving house and death. We also discuss who used the computers
the most, and what they were used for.

[^1]: L. Fitzgerald, ‘New 3g Network Falls Short for Stations and
    Communities near Barrow Creek, Northern Territory’,
    http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-08-25/barrow-creek-3g-network-lacking/5693386.

[^2]: Fitzgerald, ‘New 3g Network Falls Short for Stations and
    Communities near Barrow Creek, Northern Territory’.

[^3]: See L. Tingle, *Political Amnesia: How We Forgot How to Govern*,
    Quarterly Essay*,* Melbourne: Black Inc., 2015, p. 32.

[^4]: Commonwealth of Australia, ‘Budget: Indigenous Partnerships’,
    http://www.budget.gov.au/2005-06/ministerial/html/dotars-12.htm.

[^5]: H. Raiche, ‘Universal Communications in a Broadband World: Working
    Paper’, Inaugural Australian Communications Consumer Action Network
    (ACCAN) Conference, Melbourne, 2010.

    McElhinney, ‘Telecommunications Liberalisation and the Quest for
    Universal Service in Australia’.

[^6]: E. Rennie and J. Potts, ‘Auction Subsidies and the Universal
    Service Obligation: The Case for Remote Indigenous Communities’,
    Submission to the Regional Telecommunications Independent Review
    (RTIRC), 2015, http://www.rtirc.gov.au/submissions/.

[^7]: Some have speculated that the current twenty-year USO contract
    between the Commonwealth and Telstra was arrived at to secure
    Telstra’s existing infrastructure for the NBN, exposing the
    vulnerability of the USO to manipulation (it is awarded by
    ministerial powers, see P. Fletcher MP, ‘Speech to the ACCAN USO
    Forum’,
    http://paulfletcher.com.au/speeches/portfolio-speeches/item/1316-speech-to-the-accan-uso-forum.html).
    Telstra’s competitors have argued that the USO subsidy would be
    better directed at extending the NBN and utilizing it to expand
    mobile services in particular.

    Vodafone Hutchison Australia, ‘Regional Telecommunications Review
    2015: Submission by Vodafone Hutchison Australia’, 2015,
    http://www.rtirc.gov.au/submissions/.

[^8]: Regional Telecommunications Independent Review Committee (RTIRC),
    *Regional Telecommunications Review 2015: Unlocking the Potential in
    Regional Australia,* Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia, 2015, p.
    21.

[^9]: Commonwealth of Australia, ‘Budget Paper No. 2: Expense Measures:
    A New Remote Indigenous Housing Strategy’,
    http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/bp2/html/bp2\_expense-19.htm.

[^10]: Daly, *Bridging the Digital Divide: The Role of Community Online
    Access Centres in Indigenous Communities*.

[^11]: Rennie et al., ‘Beyond Public Access? Reconsidering Broadband for
    Remote Indigenous Communities’.

[^12]: Peter Farr Consultants Australasia, *Connecting Our Communities:
    Sustainable Networking Strategies for Australian Remote Indigenous
    Communities,* Canberra: Department of Communications Information
    Technology and the Arts, 2003.

[^13]: Regional Telecommunications Inquiry, *Connecting Regional
    Australia,* Canberra: Department of Communications, Information
    Technology and the Arts, 2002.

[^14]: RTIRC, *Regional Telecommunications Review 2015: Unlocking the
    Potential in Regional Australia,* Canberra: Commonwealth of
    Australia, 2015.

[^15]: C.A. Blanchard, *Return to Country: The Aboriginal Homelands
    Movement in Australia,* Canberra: The House of Representatives
    Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs, 1987.

[^16]: R. McGregor, *Indifferent Inclusion: Aboriginal People and the
    Australian Nation*, Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press, 2011, p.
    171.

[^17]: B. Beadman, ‘“A Tortuous Trail”: Bob Beadman's Short History of
    Outstations’*,*
    http://aliceonline.com.au/2011/10/17/a-tortuous-trail-bob-beadmans-short-history-of-outstations/.

[^18]: Amnesty International, *The Land Holds Us: Aboriginal Peoples'
    Right to Traditional Homelands in the Northern Territory,* Broadway
    NSW: Amnesty International, 2011, p. 13.

[^19]: Blanchard, *Return to Country: The Aboriginal Homelands Movement
    in Australia*.

[^20]: Northern Territory Department of Education, ‘Enrolment and
    Attendance Statistics’,
    http://www.education.nt.gov.au/students/at-school/enrolment-attendance/enrolment-attendance-statistics/2013-enrolment-and-attendance-statistics,
    p. 1.

[^21]: J. Altman, *In Search of an Outstations Policy for Indigenous
    Australians,* Canberra: Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy
    Research, 2006.

    See also: E. Kowal, ‘Is Culture the Problem or the Solution?
    Outstation Health and the Politics of Remoteness’ in J. Altman and
    M. Hinkson (eds) *Culture Crisis: Anthropology and Politics in
    Aboriginal Australia*, Sydney: University of New South Wales Press,
    2010.

[^22]: Indigenous Housing and Infrastructure Branch of the Department of
    Family and Community Services, *Review of the National Homelands
    Policy: Stage One,* Centre for Appropriate Technology, 2004, p. iv.

[^23]: While the resourcing of remote communities and services has
    largely been managed at the state level, outstation funding had
    remained with the Commonwealth when the Northern Territory
    government was formed in 1978. The Commonwealth retained
    responsibility, possibly because of the assumption that the Northern
    Territory government (CLP at the time) might be hostile to the
    intentions of land rights.

[^24]: For instance: Beadman, ‘“A Tortuous Trail”: Bob Beadman's Short
    History of Outstations’.

[^25]: P. Mares, ‘Homeland Security: NT Indigenous Affairs Minister
    Outlines Policy’,
    http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/nationalinterest/homeland-security-nt-indigenous-affairs-minister/3147812\#transcript.

    See also: Altman, *In Search of an Outstations Policy for Indigenous
    Australians*.

    S. Kerins, *The First-Ever Northern Territory Homelands/Outstations
    Policy CAEPR Topical Issue No. 09/2009*, Canberra: ANU Centre for
    Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2009.

[^26]: A. Vanstone, ‘Beyond Conspicuous Compassion: Indigenous
    Australians Deserve More Than Good Intentions’, Address to the
    Australia and New Zealand School of Government, Australian National
    University, Canberra, 7 December 2005.

    H. Hughes, *Lands of Shame: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
    'Homelands' in Transition,* Sydney: Centre for Independent Studies,
    2007.

[^27]: G. Johns, *No Job No House: An Economically Strategic Approach to
    Remote Aboriginal Housing,* Canberra: The Menzies Research Centre,
    2009.

[^28]: Imangara’s housing was upgraded under this arrangement.

[^29]: The number 423 includes 348 outstations, forty-five town camps
    and thirty larger communities (who remain on outstation funding list
    as legacy from previous funding arrangements by the Commonwealth).

[^30]: M. Moran, ‘The Viability of 'Hub' Settlements’, *Dialogue* 29.1
    (2010).

[^31]: Kerins, *The First-Ever Northern Territory Homelands/Outstations
    Policy*, p. 5.

[^32]: R. Grey-Gardner and M. Young, *Utopia Homelands Project: Lessons
    from Experience,* Centre for Appropriate Technology, Urapuntja
    Aboriginal Corporation and the Australian Government Department of
    Prime Minister and Cabinet, 2014, p. 4.

[^33]: W. Sanders. *Working Future: A Critique of Policy by Numbers,*
    Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2010.

[^34]: Rennie et al., ‘Home Internet for Remote Indigenous Communities’.

[^35]: K.W. Seemann, M. Parnell, S. McFallan and S. Tucker, *Housing for
    Livelihoods: The Lifecycle of Housing and Infrastructure through a
    Whole-of-System Approach in Remote Aboriginal Settlements,* Vol. 29,
    Alice Springs: Desert Knowledge CRC, 2008.

[^36]: R. Grey-Gardner and M. Young, *Utopia Homelands Project: Lessons
    from Experience*, p. 10.

[^37]: See Crouch 2014 for a detailed description: A. Crouch, *Home
    Internet for Remote Indigenous Communities: Technical Report,* Alice
    Springs: Centre for Appropriate Technology, 2014.

[^38]: US Department of Commerce, *A Nation Online: How Americans Are
    Expanding Their Use of the Internet*, Economics and Statistics
    Administration and National Telecommunications and Information
    Administration, 2002, p. 2.

[^39]: N. Selwyn, ‘Reconsidering Political and Popular Understandings of
    the Digital Divide’, *New Media & Society* 6.3 (2004): 345.

[^40]: J. Van Dijk and K. Hacker, ‘The Digital Divide as a Complex and
    Dynamic Phenomenon’, *The Information Society* 19.4 (2003).

    P. DiMaggio and E. Hargittai, ‘From the “Digital Divide” to “Digital
    Inequality”: Studying Internet Use as Penetration Increases’
    *Princeton Center for Arts and Cultural Policy Studies* 4.1 (2001):
    4-2.

[^41]: Selwyn, ‘Reconsidering Political and Popular Understandings of
    the Digital Divide’: 346.

[^42]: M. Warschauer, ‘Dissecting the 'Digital Divide': A Case Study in
    Egypt’, *The Information Society* 194 (2003): 297-304.

    P. Norris, ‘The Worldwide Digital Divide’, Annual Meeting of the
    Political Studies Association of the UK, London School of Economics
    and Political Science, 2000.

[^43]: E. Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social
    Disadvantage and the Information Society,* London, UK: Department
    for Communities and Local Government, 2008, p. 8.

[^44]: For a useful overview, see E. Helsper, A. Van Deursen and R.
    Eynon, *Tangible Outcomes of Internet Use: From Digital Skills to
    Tangible Outcomes Project Report,* Oxford Internet Institute,
    University of Twente and London School of Economics and Political
    Science, 2015.

[^45]: Such as: S. Livingstone and E. Helsper, ‘Gradations in Digital
    Inclusion: Children, Young People and the Digital Divide’, *New
    Media & Society* 9.4 (2007).

[^46]: E.M. Rogers, *Diffusion of Innovations,* 5th edition, New York:
    Free Press, 2003.

    K.E. Pearce and R.E. Rice, ‘Digital Divides from Access to
    Activities: Comparing Mobile and Personal Computer Internet Users’,
    *Journal of Communication* 63.4 (2013).

[^47]: A. Van Deursen, J. van Dijk, and M. Peter, ‘Increasing
    Inequalities in What We Do Online: A Longitudinal Cross Sectional
    Analysis of Internet Activities among the Dutch Population (2010 to
    2013) over Gender, Age, Education, and Income’, *Telematics and
    Informatics* 32.2 (2015): 259.

[^48]: E. Helsper, ‘A Corresponding Fields Model for the Links between
    Social and Digital Exclusion’, *Communication Theory* 22.4 (2012).

[^49]: ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation,
    ‘World Internet Project (Australia)’,
    http://www.cci.edu.au/projects/world-internet-project-australia.

    See also: Australian Communications and Media Authority,
    *Communications Report 2012-13*, Canberra: Commonwealth of
    Australia, 2013.

[^50]: R. Morsillo, ‘Affordable Broadband for All Australians’,
    *Telecommunications Journal of Australia* 62 5 (2012): 78.1-78.16.

    S. Ewing and J. Thomas, *The Internet in Australia*, Brisbane: ARC
    Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation, 2010.

[^51]: Administered by the former department of Families, Health,
    Community Services and Indigenous Affiars (FaHCSIA).

[^52]: T. Correa and I. Pavez, ‘Digital Inclusion in Rural Areas: A
    Qualitative Exploration of Challenges Faced by People from Isolated
    Communities’, International Communications Association Conference,
    San Juan, 2015, p. 5.

[^53]: T. Rowse, ‘Re-Figuring ‘Indigenous Culture”’ in J. Altman and M.
    Hinkson (eds) *Culture Crisis: Anthropology and Politics in
    Aboriginal Australia*, Sydney: University of New South Wales Press,
    2010, p. 157.

[^54]: A. Sen, *Social Exclusion: Concept, Application, and Scrutiny,*
    Manila: Asian Development Bank, 2000.

[^55]: Sen, *Social Exclusion: Concept, Application, and Scrutiny*.

    M. Nussbaum, ‘Capabilities as Fundamental Entitlements: Sen and
    Social Justice’, *Feminist Economics* 9.2-3 (2003).

    J. Bath and N. Biddle,’ Measures of Indigenous Wellbeing and Their
    Determinants across the Life Course’, CAEPR Lecture Series, The
    Australian National University, 2011.

[^56]: A. Sen, *Social Exclusion: Concept, Application, and Scrutiny*,
    p. 29.

[^57]: Rowse, ‘Re-Figuring “Indigenous Culture’’’, p. 156.

[^58]: Kenneth L. Kraemer, Jason Dedrick and Prakul Sharma, ‘One Laptop
    Per Child: Vision Vs. Reality’, *Communications of the ACM* 52 6
    (2009): 66-73.

    David W. Grissmer, Rena F. Subotnik, and Martin Orland, *A Guide to
    Incorporating Multiple Methods in Randomized Controlled Trials to
    Assess Intervention Effects*, Washington, DC: American Psychological
    Association (2009).

    Abhijit V. Bannerjee, and Esther Duflo, *Poor Economics: A Radical
    Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty*, New York: Public
    Affairs.

[^59]: Rennie et al., *Home Internet for Remote Indigenous Communities*

[^60]: With funding from the Aboriginals Benefits Account (ABA).

[^61]: See F. Enghel and K. Wilkins, ‘Communication, Media and
    Development: Problems and Perspectives’, *Nordicom Review* 33
    (Special Issue) (2012).

    J. Servaes, ‘Introduction’ in J. Servaes (ed) *Communication for
    Development and Social Change,* New Delhi: Sage, 2008.

[^62]: P. Chakravartty, ‘Rebranding Development Communications in
    Emergent India’, *Nordicom Review* 33 (Special Issue), (2012).

[^63]: T.T. Sreekumar and M. Rivera–Sánchez, ‘ICTs and Development
    Revisiting the Asian Experience’, *Science Technology & Society*
    13.2 (2008): 165.

[^64]: M.L. Best and C.M. Maclay, ‘Community Internet Access in Rural
    Areas: Solving the Economic Sustainability Puzzle’, in G. S.
    Kirkman, P. K. Cornelius, J. D. Sachs and K. Schwab (eds) *The
    Global Information Technology Report: Readiness for the Networked
    World*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 83.

[^65]: F. Ginsburg, ‘Rethinking the Digital Age’ in *The Media and
    Social Theory,* New York: Routledge (2008).

[^66]: W. Mazzarella. ‘Beautiful Balloon: The Digital Divide and the
    Charisma of New Media in India’, *American Ethnologist* 37.4 (2010).

[^67]: Mazzarella. ‘Beautiful Balloon: The Digital Divide and the
    Charisma of New Media in India’.

[^68]: See A. Crouch, ‘The Community Phone Project: An Overview’, DKCRC
    Working Paper 46, Alice Springs: Desert Knowledge CRC, 2009.

[^69]: The CAT phones project was replaced with the solar and satellite
    community phones operated by Australian Private Networks from 2009
    (see Chapter 9).

[^70]: See P. Batty, *Governing Cultural Difference: The Incorporation
    of the Aboriginal Subject into the Mechanisms of Government with
    Reference to the Development of Aboriginal Radio and Television in
    Central Australia,* Adelaide: University of South Australia, 2003.

    M. Hinkson, ‘What's in a Dedication? On Being a Warlpiri DJ’, *The
    Australian Journal of Anthropology* 15.2 (2004).

[^71]: Hinkson, ‘What's in a Dedication? On Being a Warlpiri DJ’, p.
    110.

[^72]: Rennie et al., ‘At Home on the Outstation: Barriers to Home
    Internet in Remote Indigenous Communities’.

[^73]: C. Sandvig, ‘The Internet as an Infrastructure’ in W.H. Dutton
    (ed) *The Oxford Handbook of Internet Studies* (2013), Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, p. 92.

[^74]: Funding from the Aboriginals Benefit Account.

[^75]: Essentially, all the computers on each service in the communities
    shared 17GB per month at full speed (up to 4MBps), split between
    morning (12GB) and afternoon/evening (5GB), after which the speed
    dropped to a much slower speed, comparable to dial-up (64Kbps).

[^76]: Y. Musharbash, *Yuendumu Everyday: Contemporary Life in Remote
    Aboriginal Australia*, Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press, 2009.

[^77]: Lenovo, ‘TBR Quality Project,
    http://www.partnerinfo.lenovo.com/partners/us/products/downloads/thinkcentre-mseries/TBR-Quality-Study-ExecSummary.pdf.

    Crouch, *Home Internet for Remote Indigenous Communities: Technical
    Report.*
