#Acknowledgements

We are indebted to the residents of Imangara, Kwale Kwale and
Mungalawurru communities in the Northern Territory for sharing their
time and knowledge with us, and for their active involvement in what
they referred to as ‘the computer project’.

*Internet on the Outstation* is the result of a multi-year collaboration
between the Swinburne Institute for Social Research, the Centre for
Appropriate Technology (CAT), the Central Land Council (CLC), and the
Australian Communications Consumer Action Network (ACCAN). Ellie Rennie,
Eleanor Hogan and Julian Thomas were all based at Swinburne when the
research and writing for this book occurred. Andrew Crouch and Robin
Gregory were working at CAT, and Alyson Wright was working for the CLC.

CAT is an Aboriginal not-for-profit organization that works towards
sustainable livelihoods for those living in remote communities, and
conducts research into, and development of, appropriate technologies.
CAT was formed in the 1980s when the outstation movement was gaining
momentum, and much of its work today is still focused on small remote
communities, known as ‘outstations’. In CAT’s definition, appropriate
technologies meet the economic, cultural, environmental and social needs
of the people, and design and development occurs through consultation
and collaboration with communities. In his history of CAT, Alan Mayne
writes that CAT’s ‘appropriate technologies’, ‘together with the
research and design process that produces them, their regular servicing
and the training and education programmes that inform their use, are
making a difference in communities throughout remote Australia’.[^1]

The CLC is a statutory body set up under the Aboriginal Land Rights Act
(NT). The CLC’s history is deeply imbued with Aboriginal justice,
recognition and the fight for land rights. The primary functions of the
CLC are to help traditional landowners in the management of their
country in the southern half of the Northern Territory. Through advocacy
and policy work, the ninety-member Council also represents the
interests, rights and concerns of Aboriginal people across regions.

The CLC believes that the provision of access to communication
technologies is an essential service in remote communities. The focus of
much of their work in this area has been on addressing disadvantages in
service and access levels for remote residents, affordability issues,
rights to service and increasing the choice of communication options for
remote communities. The CLC remains concerned about the future of small
remote communities in Central Australia because of a lack of funding
commitment from both levels of government, and an increasing move to
prioritize larger communities when allocating funding. This is despite a
robust determination of traditional owners to remain living on or near
their country.

ACCAN is Australia’s peak body for consumer representation in
communications, spanning residential consumers and small businesses,
including not-for profit organizations, insofar as they are consumers.
ACCAN assists people to make good choices about products and services,
and makes representations to policy makers and industry on behalf of its
broad and diverse membership.

The Swinburne Institute for Social Research is located within Swinburne
University of Technology in Melbourne. A core group of researchers
within the Institute is looking at digital transformations, and how they
are impacting on Australia’s economy, social inclusion, cultural policy,
health and wellbeing. The Institute is also a node of the ARC Centre of
Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation (CCI), led by Stuart
Cunningham, and our research in Central Australia was conducted as part
of CCI’s wider research program on the social, economic and cultural
dimensions of broadband services.

A number of people from each of these organizations provided additional
assistance during the project. Thanks are due to Ruth Elvin for her
encouragement and advice during her time at CAT; Julian Cleary and Peter
Donohoe from CLC for stepping in during Alyson’s maternity leave; Robin
McNaughton, Michael Charlton, Teresa Corbin, Una Lawrence and Ryan
Sengara from ACCAN for their contributions; and Jake Goldenfein from
Swinburne for assisting us during the Papunya research fieldwork, and
for collaborating on research into the Northern Territory Emergency
Response (NTER; known as ‘the Intervention’).

The research was funded in three phases. ACCAN’s Grants Scheme funded
the first phase of the project (the ‘baseline study’) in 2010. As the
peak consumer representation body in communications, ACCAN awards grants
each year for research and advocacy projects that align with its goal of
available, accessible and affordable communications for all Australians.
We are very grateful to ACCAN for kickstarting this research, and for
continuing on the project after that grant concluded. CCI’s support,
especially in the early stages of the work, was also critical.

The Aboriginals Benefit Account funded the hardware, maintenance and
training components of the project. As described in the book, CAT led
the technical and training aspects of the work, and undertook regular
visits to the communities to provide them with assistance.

The data collection for the social research (2011-2014) was funded
through an Australian Research Council (ARC) Linkage Project grant. In
addition to the ARC funding, each organization contributed substantial
in-kind time. In particular, CAT provided Andrew’s time, CLC provided
Alyson’s time (and car), and Swinburne contributed Ellie and Julian’s
time. The Swinburne research team also received a grant from Google
Australia, which enabled us to do additional work on the NTER
legislation and its implications for publicly-funded computers.

During the course of the project, we conducted research in two larger
communities. We would like to thank the people of Ali Curung and Papunya
for allowing us to carry out this work. In particular, we thank Jessie
Simpson and Roseanne Holmes, who worked with Ellie and Alyson to
administer the Ali Curung survey, and provided invaluable cultural
advice regarding questions to be included. Derek Walker assisted Peter
Donohoe with the ‘men’s side’ of the Ali Curung survey. We are grateful
to both of them for helping rectify the gender imbalance in our original
survey results. We also thank Sammy Butcher at Papunya for his support
of the study; Ashton Kealy, Mary McMullen, Rebecca Smith and Ryan
Raggatt for their assistance in the computer room; and Jenny and Blair
McFarland at the Central Australian Youth Link Up Service (CAYLUS) for
providing ongoing information about ICT arrangements in the MacDonnell
region.

We wish also to thank the members of the Project Reference Group for
their advice and guidance. Membership of the Reference Group shifted
over time, and included representatives of the Australian government
Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy; the
Indigenous Remote Communications Association; the ARC Centre of
Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation; and senior officers
of the sponsoring organizations.

Broadband for the Bush (B4B) emerged as a key forum for us to discuss
our findings over the course of the project, and to make connections
with other organizations working on similar issues. We thank the members
of B4B for their committed advocacy and policy development work, and for
bringing the communication needs of Indigenous people living in remote
areas to the attention of policymakers and telcos.

Finally, the genesis of this work was a conversation between two old
friends in 2009: Julian Thomas, Director of the Swinburne Institute for
Social Research, and the late Peter Taylor when he was CEO of CAT. Ellie
Rennie (who was living in Alice Springs and working for the Swinburne
Institute) was introduced to CAT through that connection, and began to
explore the issue of the digital divide with Andrew Crouch in 2009. The
project would not have happened if it were not for Peter’s passion for
communications and his deep knowledge of the circumstances of remote
communities. His sudden death in 2013 was a great loss for central
Australia.

Sections of this book have been adapted from our own prior publications:
the opening anecdote comes from an *Inside Story* article.[^2] Part of
the cyber safety discussion in Chapter 5 was also published in *Inside
Story*.[^3] The discussion of gender in Chapter 7 appears in *Australian
Aboriginal Studies*.[^4] We published the findings from the baseline
study in *Telecommunications Policy*, and the findings from the 2009
computer center survey (discussed in Chapter 1) in *Communication
Politics and Culture*.[^5]

Names and Permissions
=====================

The research described in this book was conducted with the informed
consent of the communities involved. The individuals concerned gave
their approval for the anecdotes to be published. Each individual was
given a choice as to whether they wanted their name to appear in the
book. Residents from Kwale Kwale and Mungalawurru chose to use their own
names, while those at Imangara chose pseudonyms. We also obtained
permission from senior residents for the descriptions of the three
communities, use of community names, numerous small details, and the
overall arguments of the chapters. We presented draft information on
Papunya and Ali Curung to senior community members in order to obtain
feedback. 

Map
===

![](imgs/Rennie_ImageMap.tif)

Introduction
============

On one of our first visits to Mungalawurru, a small Aboriginal community
eighty kilometres northwest of Tennant Creek, a senior man asked if he
could use our Toyota Land Cruiser’s high-frequency radio. His relative
was in hospital and he wanted to know how the man was faring. The
extended family gathered around the car as we made contact. The doctor
informed everyone that the patient was awake and recovering, but his leg
had been amputated.

That day our radio was the only means by which the residents of
Mungalawurru could contact the outside world. The one payphone in the
community was out of order – a regular occurrence – and there were no
home phones. A few people owned mobile phones, but to make the call,
they had to drive along an unsealed road halfway back to Tennant Creek
to the old Warrego gold mine, where you can pick up a bar or two of
reception on some handsets. There was only one laptop among the
twenty-two permanent residents of Mungalawurru, but it wasn’t connected
to the internet.

That visit occurred in 2010, when over 80 per cent people in Australia
over the age of 14 were using the internet.[^6] Mungalawurru’s somewhat
extreme degree of isolation was about to change. We were doing the
groundwork for a project that would provide computers and internet
access, along with training and maintenance, to households in three
small communities. Kwale Kwale, forty kilometres west of Alice Springs,
was the first to be connected, followed Mungalawurru and then Imangara,
which lies between Alice Springs and Tennant Creek, east of the Stuart
Highway.

Aside from finding out which households wanted internet access, we hoped
to discover why – despite government programs – people didn’t have it
already and whether they saw potential benefits in being online. We
weren’t testing new satellite speeds or trying out a new e-health
application; we were simply attempting to connect households to the
existing, standard satellite broadband, using the most
commonly-available equipment. The process of doing this, however,
revealed the obvious ways in which the broadband market and government
policies were failing to serve remote Aboriginal communities.

This book tells the story of what became known in research circles as
the Home Internet Project, or ‘the computer project’ within the
communities themselves. The simplicity of those titles belied the
bafflingly low rates of internet adoption in these communities. Six in
10 adults in the communities had never used the internet when we made
that trip in 2010. A third of those who had used a computer at some
point in the past had not used the internet, some having only used
computers to play solitaire; others for sharing music. Three quarters of
those who had used the internet were under the age of 30.

The 2011 Census revealed low rates of internet adoption amongst
Aboriginal people living in remote areas compared to elsewhere.[^7]
Fewer than 4 in 10 Indigenous households in remote and very remote
Australia had an internet connection at home, compared with over 8 in 10
households of the total Australian population. In some parts of the
country the figure was much lower, such as the Barkly region in central
Australia (excluding the township of Tennant Creek), where take-up was
less than 1 in 10 for Indigenous households. The term ‘digital divide’
describes those who are accessing the benefits of computers and the
internet, and those who are not. In Australia, the divide is widest
between Aboriginal people living in remote areas and non-Aboriginal
people living in the same area.

The purpose of this book is threefold. Firstly, we examine the reasons
for the digital divide, looking at the particular circumstances and ways
of life within remote communities that have contributed to low rates of
household internet adoption, particularly in small communities. We pay
particular attention to the cultural and economic systems (both
traditional and contemporary) that influence internet adoption and use.
Secondly, we seek to demonstrate the ways in which broadband is changing
life in remote communities. What are the consequences of digital
exclusion, and to what extent can broadband help overcome the hardship
and inconveniences of living in remote settlements? Thirdly, the Home
Internet Project was established as a trial (see Chapter 1), in that it
set out to implement an alternative to current digital divide strategies
in remote Australia. Where the insights of this book relate to policy
frameworks and industry behaviours, we have attempted to outline those
connections and suggest new approaches.

### Outstations

The majority of Indigenous Australians live in cities and regional towns
along the eastern seaboard. Indigenous Australians, however, are much
more highly represented in remote areas, making up 2.4 per cent of the
non-remote population and 27.6 per cent of the remote population.[^8]

Outstations, also referred to as ‘homelands’ in some regions of
Australia, are small Aboriginal communities located on Aboriginal land.
In the Northern Territory, approximately 10,000 Aboriginal Australians
live on outstations.[^9] Although outstation residents represent a
comparatively small subset of Australia’s total Indigenous population,
they constitute a significant proportion of total Aboriginal
settlements. Of Australia’s 1,187 remote communities, 500 are
outstations in the NT, comprising more than 2,400 dwellings. Almost
three-quarters of all Aboriginal communities have a population of fewer
than fifty people, and only seventeen have a population of more than
1,000 people.[^10]

The three communities in this book differ in their size, and in their
distance from major towns (Kwale Kwale 40 kilometers; Mungalawarru 80
kilometers; and Imangara 200 kilometers). Between 6 and 18 houses were
located on each outstation, although not all houses were habitable the
entire time. Occupancy fluctuated, dictated by issues including access
to services such as schools, incarceration, wasp nests, broken pipes,
housing revitalization programs, visitors and family tragedy. Each
community also contained additional structures, such as sheds, that were
used for a range of activities including clinic visits, as places of
worship, and for enterprise (see Chapter 2). The largest community has
around 100 permanent residents, and the smallest only twelve.

It is true to say that outstations are generally very small. However,
although defining outstations by size of population is convenient for
data collection and bureaucratic processes, it does not adequately
convey their purpose or place. Families who choose to live on
outstations have a direct ancestral connection to the land. This is
distinct from other communities, where people have relocated from
different places into administratively identified settlements, either
through necessity or coercion. As Jon Altman points out, even this
definition tends to create a ‘false dichotomy in settlement hierarchies
between larger discrete Indigenous townships and smaller outstations’,
when in fact regular movement between townships and outstations ‘is a
culturally distinctive feature of the way Aboriginal people live’ (see
Chapter 2).[^11] Our investigation of the internet on outstations works
with this more fluid understanding, recognizing both the ties and
movements that are typical of outstation life, and which can seem at
odds with mainstream conceptions of domestic internet use as a permanent
and stable form of connectivity.

Kinship systems and practices carried through from pre-colonial times
continue to govern life in remote communities to varying degrees, and
families in some regions speak one or more Aboriginal languages at home.
More than five Aboriginal languages were spoken across the three
outstations, including Warumungu, Alyawarr and Arrernte. As
anthropologists have observed, the contemporary Indigenous sociality of
remote communities is an expression of both traditional and Western
culture, including new capabilities ‘in language, technology, practical
knowledge, ritual, and ways of organizing social, political and economic
life’.[^12] The communities discussed in this book are still traditional
in many respects, while also living within, negotiating and
participating in contemporary systems. We were made aware of this
regularly during our visits, such as when we attempted to follow up a
computer-related request with a resident, only to be told that she had
gone ‘porcupine’ \[echidna\] hunting. Such practices, a continuation of
the oldest living culture in the world, sat alongside media consumption
habits not unlike those of mainstream Australian households – including
news, video clips, computer games and social networking applications.

Media anthropologist Serper Tenhunen proposes the concept of ‘social
logistics’ as a tool for understanding ‘relationships between
technology, culture and social structure’ of the kind that we are
concerned with in this book.[^13] Such an approach looks at how
communication technologies are taken up and adapted within different
cultural settings, showing how the various uses are bent to fit within
the particular social organization of a time and place, including
cultural and institutional ways of doing. Some scholars have rejected
the terms ‘adoption’ and ‘use’, as these imply that there exists a
uniform and uncomplicated pattern of encountering communication
technology, denying that consumption is active and that technologies can
be objects of desire for some and disregarded by others.[^14] We have
chosen to retain the terms adoption and use, partly to emphasize that
choices also occur within particular regimes – the retail offerings,
infrastructures and programs developed and offered by agencies and
businesses that are often separate from, and external to, life in remote
communities. The level to which these structures are adaptable or
inflexible, and the strategies people develop in order to work around,
or away from, such regimes, are important for understanding the digital
divide. The various attempts to resolve communication infrastructure in
remote Australia also reveal the aspirations and assumptions about how
remote communities should exist in relation to the so-called outside
world. These mutations of the policy apparatus have been surprisingly
disconnected from other attempts to construct, remedy or intervene in
the welfare of the Territory’s remote communities (see Chapter 1). This
book therefore sits within a media studies tradition of policy analysis,
grounded in the observable daily use of information and communications
technology (ICT).

Our investigations into internet use revealed a social setting that was
embedded within traditional structures, but where those ways of
organizing and understanding the world blended into everyday,
non-traditional activities. For instance, when we asked about his online
contacts, one man told us, ‘I don’t have friends, only family’,
referring to a possibly extensive kinship network rather than social
isolation. Although we were not privy to the depth of such relationships
from our limited position as researchers investigating media, we were
given some insights into how communications technologies (internet and
mobile phones) are creating new social configurations and placing
pressure on customs. Chapter 5 discusses these issues in relation to
cyber-safety concerns that arose in the township of Tennant Creek during
the course of our work.

The residents’ everyday concerns included shopping and transactions as
well as interests that were intensely local, such as responsibilities to
land councils, ensuring young people are aware of their obligations to
others, and negotiating with outsiders, including us. While policy
commentators often notice that cultural meetings and funeral business
take people away from their outstation base, we observed that rodeos and
local show days had the same outcome. To us, such movements between
communities and towns were interesting, because they have consequences
for how people stay connected, and for their preferences in terms of
retail offerings and devices, as discussed in Chapters 8 and 9.

### Internet Access and Telecommunications

The detailed longitudinal data on which much of this book is based
concerns one particular regime of access: home internet, meaning
internet accessed within the domestic setting and managed by the
householders. Our intention in looking at home internet was to test some
cultural assumptions that were influencing policy decisions at the time
we commenced the study. However, we have also endeavoured to describe
other systems of internet access (see Chapters 8 and 9) in order to
explore the dynamics of other regimes.

From the start, our interest in home internet was more explorative than
developmental. We provided households in the three communities with
access to a computer and an internet connection in order to understand
why such a common means of internet access was not being taken up by
residents. Although we were curious to know whether internet would
transform life in the communities, we did not set out to achieve
transformation, in the way that ‘ICT for development’ seeks to do (see
Chapter 2). Rather, our interest was in how the infrastructures of the
internet – including the technologies, public policy programs and retail
mechanisms – were serving or failing this particular population. If the
residents gave up on their home internet, or decided to do things
differently, that would be as revealing as if they embraced the
technology outright.

When we commenced the project, we had various hypotheses as to why these
outstations had not sought out internet services. One hypothesis was
that it was simply a matter of affordability, given the very low income
of the households. We also considered practical matters to do with
housing such as living arrangements, the condition of the houses, and
being home long enough to want a permanent connection to the internet.
We were well aware of the physical challenges to infrastructure, with
one of our partners, the Centre for Appropriate Technology (CAT), having
conducted various surveys and infrastructure projects in the region over
the years. However, we did not know how long computers and related
electronics could withstand the heat, dust and vermin.

A great deal occurred during those four years, both within the
communities and externally. As described in the Chapter 2, we provided
free internet connections and maintained computers for two and a half
years. Our presence and purpose in the communities changed the dynamics
of what home internet meant to these households. CAT dealt with the
installers, and replaced and repaired equipment on a regular basis. We
all attempted to help residents, showing them how to do certain things,
listening to their concerns, and repeatedly explaining how they could
maintain a connection of their own in the future. All these efforts
meant that when the choice came to take out an internet connection of
their own, many households chose to do so.

Beyond these communities, the communications landscape was constantly
changing. During our various travels beyond the outstations (comparative
work on the project, as well as interactions between the two Indigenous
organizations on the project team), we observed that different groups
were accessing the internet in different ways. For instance, some were
conducting online transactions intermittently at internet kiosks located
in caravan parks and council offices. Others were playing computer games
while in prison or rehabilitation facilities. Where there were remote
media centers or schools, these provided important (although monitored)
forms of access. As the years went by, we witnessed more people using
mobile phones and tablets when in town, in what seemed to be a sudden
spike in mobile device use in the region. We concluded that remote
Aboriginal communities have vastly different levels and means of
internet access depending on community size, proximity to larger towns
or tourist sites, and on the agencies and businesses that interact with
them. We have incorporated examples of the various regimes of access,
and compared and contrasted these where possible (Chapter 8).

### Broadband Policy

The assorted and irregular nature of internet use in remote Australia
needs to be seen within the historical trajectory of telecommunications
in Australia. As we discuss in Chapter 1, remote regions were last to
receive telecommunications, and only then through government programs,
including payphones, subsidies to offset costs, price controls such as
untimed local calls for landlines within certain areas, and community
infrastructure programs.[^15] By 2007, 77 per cent of all remote
communities had some form of telecommunication service, but for many
this consisted of one public telephone; only 20 per cent of the
population in remote communities had a fixed telephone line, and only 26
per cent of communities had mobile telephone coverage.[^16] Since then,
various public-private initiatives have extended mobile coverage to more
communities, but the cost of mobile telephone infrastructure remains
prohibitive for many communities, as well as being economically unviable
for providers. By 2015, a total of seventeen locations in the lower half
of the Northern Territory had mobile coverage – twelve of which include
residential dwellings – making mobile broadband at home available to
approximately 50 per cent of the Aboriginal population of the
region.[^17] Larger communities tend to be better serviced: Across the
entire Northern Territory (including the Top End), seventy-four remote
communities had a population greater than 100 in 2015 (home to
approximately 45 000 people). Of these, thirty communities had ADSL, and
mobile telephony was available in forty-four communities.[^18]

In addition, various publicly-funded social development initiatives have
attempted to provide some level of internet access, such as computer
rooms and training provided through the Northern Territory Libraries
network and remote media organizations. Such programs have been designed
to assist Aboriginal people to discover and learn about communication
technology within community settings. As outstations are generally too
small to be eligible for such infrastructure, the communities we worked
with had not experienced the benefits of such projects.

The wide disparities in internet access between different communities
sits uncomfortably with Australia’s national broadband agenda. In recent
years, debates around inequities in broadband performance have centered
on the National Broadband Network (NBN), with a particular focus on
regional versus capital city infrastructure and speeds. The NBN is a
government-funded wholesale-only broadband network that sells to retail
service providers, who in turn sell services to the public. The initial
rationale for the NBN was to provide a nation-building infrastructure
that could provide fast broadband services to all Australians. A number
of aspects of the plan were based on this objective, and satellite
internet was incorporated into the NBN, as satellite connections can be
received anywhere via domestic satellite receivers. As discussed in
Chapter 1, the NBN was also designed with regional parity in mind,
insofar as under-serviced areas were the first to receive the
infrastructure. The model of a national wholesale infrastructure
provider was intended to serve those outside the mainstream areas by
providing a wholesale price base that would be consistent as far as
possible across the country, rather than being strictly costed at the
local level. Pricing was designed to ensure that entry-level prices
remain at pre-NBN levels for low-income consumers, providing faster and
more reliable service at the same price as ADSL.[^19]

We discuss the NBN particularly in relation to the ‘last 3 per cent’ –
those households where satellite internet was considered the only
economically viable option at the time the NBN plans were conceived, and
still is at the time of writing. As the NBN is a wholesale model,
residents in remote communities deal with the retail service providers,
rather than with NBN Co. These interactions constituted a significant
aspect of our research towards the latter part of the project, as
residents began to enter into contracts to receive NBN services (via
retail service providers) under the Interim Satellite Service. We began
to see clearly the reasons why many households in remote communities are
not acquiring satellite broadband, and prefer pre-paid mobile in areas
where mobile reception is available. Our findings suggest that faster
speeds alone, although desirable for services and business in remote
Australia, will not encourage residents of remote communities to adopt
broadband. We question whether household satellite internet – the
government’s response to internet access in remote areas – will meet the
needs of remote communities under current policy and consumer
arrangements.

Australia’s telecommunications dilemma is commonly discussed as a story
of market failure, where services to those within the country’s vast
interior are necessarily subsidized by city customers and government
programs. The outstation experience, however, reveals a more complex
picture. Communications technologies are not necessarily adopted in the
way that providers expect they will be. Moreover, what on the surface
seems like an individual choice (adoption) can occur as a group dynamic,
informed by social factors that may seem far removed from communications
policy. When the movement of people within and across communities is
taken into account, as well as their economic priorities, social
obligations, and capacities within a particular locality, it seems
unlikely that the problem of broadband adoption will be resolved through
infrastructure alone. However, changes to the way that internet is sold
and supported could make a significant difference.

### The Digital Divide and Access to Services

When we commenced, only a few studies had looked in depth at the issue
of internet adoption in remote communities. Scholars identified that
there were differences in the levels and means of access, and some
argued that online participation would provide a means for Aboriginal
people to maintain their cultural heritage and engage young people.[^20]
Internet access had also been acknowledged in government policy and
funding programs as an area of need, although such programs were
limited, as discussed in Chapter 1.[^21]

At the same time, the digital divide was not a national emergency. In
2010, remote Aboriginal communities in the Northern Territory were
subject to an increased level of state intervention (from 2007),
intended to overcome generational social disadvantage and dysfunction.
Going without the internet was towards the bottom of a long list of
policy concerns, all of which could be characterized as deprivations in
policy terms. Indeed, describing low rates of internet adoption as a
‘divide’ seems something of an overstatement against the Commonwealth
Government’s comparatively modest-sounding *Closing the Gap* agenda,
which includes targets such as improving education outcomes (halve the
gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievements by 2018), life
expectancy (parity by 2031), and workforce participation (halve the gap
by 2018).

As described throughout the following chapters, the elders invited us
onto their lands and into their houses, interested in our proposal of
measured introduction of computers. However, our research also brought
us into contact with another, more sceptical, group of stakeholders. To
reach the communities, we travelled alongside a cavalry of remote
community workers, taking the ‘ideal combination of safety and speed’
that “only whitefella take”.[^22] On our visits out to the two northern
communities, we talked with various shire officers, government
bureaucrats, arts workers, schoolteachers, health workers and television
satellite dish installers. To some, our interest in broadband
connectivity must have seemed a curious, perhaps trivial, concern to
justify regular visits, each comprising a 1,500-kilometer round trip
from Alice Springs.

Even if it was not always apparent to those we encountered on the road,
our interest in the digital divide was partly aligned with the concerns
of the service agencies. The dispersed and remote nature of these
communities means that residents face substantial difficulties
conducting even simple transactions. In a pre-election document (2013),
the Coalition parties stated that while not all government services can
be delivered more efficiently online, the majority can be. It commended
the US and UK governments on their ‘aggressive’ commitment to online
service delivery.[^23] Accessing online services can reduce the need for
travel, and provide individuals and families with a level of autonomy
over their personal affairs (for instance, reducing the need for phone
messages, bank balances and information to be delivered through third
parties such as a store keeper or government administrator). Online
service delivery could also lower the costs to service agencies, such as
the Centrelink officers we met, who had made the journey to check that
people’s welfare payment information was up to date. For the Central
Land Council (CLC) and the CAT – Indigenous organizations themselves
facing logistical difficulties providing services and staying in touch
with outstation residents – this was a legitimate concern worth
exploring.

There are good reasons why the potential benefits of the internet need
to be considered at this point in time. As the NBN brings with it new
services and applications, those who are not connected now will fall
further behind as the benefits for others increase. However, while
recognizing the rapid transformations that are taking place at various
levels of the economy and society as a result of digital technology, we
urge caution to those who see broadband as a remedy for remote
Australia. Commonly-held aspirations for broadband relating to better
service delivery, overcoming remoteness and hardship, and cost savings,
reflect a set of external priorities. The agendas of government and NGOs
are not necessarily aligned with those of people living in remote
communities. Moreover, the expectation that ICTs will provide those
living in traditional and remote societies with greater connection to
the outside world on their own terms imposes an untested assumption that
such engagement is desired in the first place. Regardless of the
potential good that may or may not come from this, the personal and
socially-specific nature of internet use means that it may never
eventuate. And just as there is the potential to provide connectivity in
the social world within which these communities operate, so there is
potential for it to allow communities to retreat further from the
government and NGO services, and from non-Indigenous workers who serve
and assist Indigenous people through face-to-face encounters.

During the years when our research took place, outstations became the
subject of intense public debate, as discussed in Chapter 2. Outstations
have historically been associated with a politics of self-determination,
representing the right and choice of Aboriginal people to live on
country. The outstation debate has revolved around government funding
for the maintenance of outstations, including basic infrastructure such
as water and roads: whether these are entitlements of all Australians
regardless of where they live, or whether outstations should be
considered private land that residents themselves must maintain. The
practical considerations of outstation maintenance have taken place
against a backdrop of Indigenous policy change, which some have
characterized as a shift away from self-determination towards
‘mainstreaming’. The mainstreaming approach posits that relocating
residents to larger settlements with services is necessary in order to
overcome the poverty and social exclusion experienced in remote
communities. In Chapter 1, we outline the history of the outstation
movement as well as the particular policy attempts to provide
telecommunications services. Although it is the case that broadband may
assist Indigenous people to live on their lands by providing access to
some services online, without basic infrastructure, such as roads, power
and water, the future of outstations is bleak.

### The Digital Divide and Digital Choices

Digital divide debates center on whether the market can create equitable
outcomes in an information society, and on what types of infrastructure
and programs may help to overcome the divide. Two unresolved questions
preoccupy digital divide studies. Firstly, statistical studies have
drawn a link between social exclusion and digital exclusion, in that
those who are least likely to have access to the internet are also least
likely to have access to other resources. Does this mean that social
exclusion is the cause of digital exclusion? The second concern is
whether resolving digital exclusion can assist in overcoming social
exclusion. Does access to digital resources enable activities and
opportunities that can transform lives in positive ways?

Our research uncovered interesting and unique dimensions and patterns of
internet access, which took us some way towards answering these
questions. As mentioned above, not all communities experience low rates
of adoption, but there are pockets of significant exclusion. When we
look more closely at what is occurring in places of higher adoption and
those with lower adoption, this unevenness begins to make sense. As
discussed in Chapters 8 and 9, we observed a reasonably high rate (over
70 per cent) of mobile broadband adoption in Ali Curung, which has
mobile broadband coverage, however, in Imangara when we arrived, where
the only available connection was satellite internet, there was no
internet adoption. Both communities had a similar socio-economic
profile. We also observed that people fell in and out of internet use,
sometimes on a regular basis, particularly those whose lives were more
mobile (see Chapter 4). This suggests that internet adoption is not a
fixed event or a linear trajectory from non-use to advanced use. For
many, internet access is desirable, but only when other factors allow
for it.

Events such as visits by relatives, religious interests, car
availability and death impacted on how people used computers and
informed their decisions to adopt or keep hardware and internet
subscriptions. Seemingly straightforward factors such as available
infrastructure, maintenance and consumer concerns (retail options,
pricing, assistance) became complicated when the pressures and daily
rhythms of living in a remote community came into play. From these
observations, we offer some explanations as to why a household, or a
community, can go from little or no adoption to rapid adoption in a
relatively short space of time, while other households and communities
remain disconnected.

Media studies scholars have observed that some make a ‘digital choice’
not to use the internet, and that this can be related to ‘cultural
factors and the social context of individuals, which influence the
development of positive or negative attitudes towards
technologies’.[^24] In the case of outstations, factors such as billing
difficulties (related to the distinct way that money changes hands),
inconvenience in dealing with retail providers (related to language
barriers or lack of other infrastructures such as home phones), were
informing the digital choices of residents. We argue that the concept of
digital choice, while useful, does not entirely describe what is
occurring. Digital choice denotes individual decision-making, whereas in
this case the social norms of the group were resulting in whole
communities choosing not to adopt. Moreover, studies show that people
are more likely to adopt technology if others they know are already
using it, suggesting that network effects play a significant role.[^25]
When we first met the residents, people did not know that satellite
internet was an option, because no-one else they knew had chosen to
subscribe. The ‘groupish’ (what we call 'demic') networked nature of
internet adoption in remote Australia is explored further in Chapter
9.[^26]

Where others have discussed digital choices, we go further to examine
exactly what kinds of choices are being enacted in remote communities.
The choice, in this instance, is one where the choosers set targets for
particular characteristics and eliminate products that don’t meet those
targets completely (a ‘deal-breaker’ scenario). Many make a decision to
use computers and the internet regardless of their socio-economic
status, as long as the conditions of internet access suit them. Our
trial – providing assistance and maintenance for home internet – changed
the dynamics and conditions of satellite internet to the extent that
many households chose to move to NBN satellite plans at the conclusion
of the project. When available under the right conditions, home internet
is entirely possible. In Chapters 8 and 9, we offer suggestions as to
how to small communities can be better served.

### Solving Disadvantage?

The second concern of digital divide studies is whether digital
inclusion can help overcome other exclusions; for instance, whether it
enables people to overcome barriers in education, employment and health.
In this book we have attempted to provide an answer, with caveats. We
looked at what people used the internet for, and concluded that the
internet can enable a level of personal autonomy that is significant for
residents of outstations, but that this does not necessarily signify a
solution to social disadvantage. However, the applications and services
that might assist the particular and extreme disadvantages present in
remote communities did not exist in 2010-2014. Therefore, the
possibility that broadband might enable a better level of service
provision remained untested. Moreover, the elaborate uses required for
activities such as enterprise development would require a level of
training and assistance beyond the capacity of our project (see
discussion on training, Chapter 6).

Anderson and Tracey speculated in 2001 that ‘applications and services
delivered via the internet are not changing the way people live their
lives in a simple, straightforward manner, but are supporting and
enhancing their existing lifestyles, whatever those lifestyles may
be’.[^27] As we discuss in Chapter 5, residents’ use of computers and
the internet was confined to a fairly narrow set of activities:
entertainment (downloading music, watching videos), social networking,
games, storing photos, shopping and personal administration, including
banking and managing welfare payments. Only a few people used email, and
generally to receive notices of meetings or visits from external
providers (including us). The uses that we observed were clearly a
continuation of everyday activities, such as downloading gospel music in
one community where interest in Christianity was high, checking welfare
payments before making the journey into town, and browsing shopping
sites for cars that were being sold cheaper interstate.

Although individuals displayed varying degrees of interest in computers
and digital literacy levels, their uses reflected community norms and a
particular sociality of place. What then is the hope that digital
technologies might help to overcome disadvantage? With respect to
activities such as banking and managing welfare payments, internet
transactions reduce an individual’s need to interact with outside
agencies, as well as with intermediaries such as store managers.
However, the social and cultural systems that have thwarted government
attempts to overcome disadvantage can themselves persist in this
scenario.

When the internet arrived in these communities, it became ordinary for
them in the way it is for most people. A great deal of Indigenous media
studies work begins from a curiosity of whether Aboriginal people living
in remote regions are enthusiastic or fearful of the advent of new
communications technologies. Scholars have set out with the explicit
intention of discovering whether people of traditional cultures deal
with technology in unique ways (for instance, the work of Eric
Michaels).[^28] Although we touch on the question of cultural
destruction in our discussion of cyber-safety concerns (Chapter 5), it
is worth stating from the outset that the internet rapidly became just
another part of life – a mundane asset tied into routines and habits
that brought with it some advantages, as well as some newfound
frustrations. As we describe in Chapter 5, internet use is a media
practice tied in with typical quests for entertainment, to connect with
a friend, or a quick fix for personal administration. The priorities,
joys, boredoms and obligations of life in these communities did not
shift fundamentally. In Heather Horst’s words, what we observed was
‘humanity’s remarkable capacity to reimpose normativity just as quickly
as digital technologies create conditions for change’.[^29]

The idea that internet access can resolve the larger problem of
government failure in addressing disadvantage is therefore problematic.
We can say, however, that the internet brings a level of banal
administration which, due to distance, remote communities have not
previously had the benefit of, and which otherwise require arduous
strategies such as extended travel, going without, or waiting for
service providers to make contact.[^30] How these small instances of
autonomy and efficiency – basic activities that reduce otherwise
complicated means of making do – can change that critical relationship
between a people and the outside world is yet to be seen.

Understanding these dynamics took four years of regular engagement with
three small communities, using the least invasive strategies we could
manage. This book is as much about our own efforts to assist the
residents to access the internet under current constraints as it is
about the insights the residents of these communities shared with us. At
times it was a complicated endeavour, technically and interpersonally.
We went to great lengths and great expense along the way. The message of
this book, however, is that the digital divide should not be seen as an
intractable problem, and that costly solutions may not always be the
right approach. Rather, addressing the digital divide requires
understanding people’s choices and the capacities and conditions that
inform those choices.

This book is divided into three parts. Part One provides the backstory
to Australia’s digital divide, spanning the communications and
Indigenous policy arenas (Chapter 1). We also describe the residents’
experiences of the internet before we arrived, and the methods we
employed to shed light on the dynamics of internet adoption (Chapter 2).
Part Two discusses the residents’ encounters with the internet and
specific issues, including ownership of devices (Chapter 3); people’s
mobility and travel (Chapter 4); gender dynamics (Chapter 7); training
needs (Chapter 6); as well as what people used the internet for (Chapter
5). Part Three looks at other scenarios of ICT infrastructure and access
in central Australia, including the shared facilities approach that has
evolved out of various programs and policies, and mobile internet
(Chapter 8). We conclude the book by considering digital choices in
relation to the digital divide, as well as the implications for
broadband policy (Chapters 9 and Conclusion).

PART I
======

<span id="_Toc419811695" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811494" class="anchor"></span></span>Chapter 1: Policy
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

On our way to the Barkly communities, we travelled on the road named
after the first European explorer to make the journey from Australia’s
south to north coasts, John McDouall Stuart, for which he was paid a
commission associated with the establishment of a telegraph line. We
passed two heritage telegraph repeater stations, one at our starting
point in Alice Springs and the other 280 kilometers north at Barrow
Creek. Now tourist destinations, the small stone buildings once housed
the equipment and operators that connected Adelaide to Darwin and Great
Britain. On one particular trip, we asked the bar tender at the Barrow
Creek roadhouse how long he had been living there. He simply pointed to
graffiti on the wall, where he, or someone before him, had scrawled the
words ‘long enough’.

Some months after that trip, in 2014, Barrow Creek received mobile phone
coverage as part of a public-private partnership blackspots program to
extend mobile coverage and internet access to remote communities.
Telstra, the private partner, issued a statement saying that the site
was chosen partly for its proximity to fibre optic cable. The Northern
Territory government stated that the tower was to serve highway and
wayside coverage, rather than to service nearby Aboriginal communities
and a school, which remained outside of the coverage area.[^31]

The Barrow Creek mobile story illustrates the complexities of
communications infrastructure provision in remote areas: the cost
imperative (in this instance related to the use of existing
infrastructure), and the different needs of various population groups,
which include the ‘grey nomad’ campervan tourists who travel the Stuart
Highway, service providers, and Aboriginal communities. The ABC quoted a
resident of Tara, a small community near Barrow Creek, who had purchased
a mobile phone in anticipation of being able to ring her daughter in
Alice Springs from home: ‘I'm sad for us (because) I turned it on and it
didn't switch on’, said Selma Thompson. ‘It was a waste’.[^32]

The everyday life of residents of remote Indigenous communities is
unlike that of most Australians in very many ways. Remote communities
are small, isolated settlements, separated by great distances. While
they offer many rich social and cultural benefits for their residents,
they have poor transport connections, little infrastructure and scarce
resources. But as it does for other Australians, life in remote
communities involves communications: with family members in other
places, with social networks, and with governments, organizations, and
businesses. Reliable communications for the people who live and work in
remote Australia are all the more essential on account of their
isolation, and unlike urban Australians, they have never taken these for
granted. Despite many positive developments, adequate communications are
still not the reality for most Indigenous communities, and the problem
of securing them has been a challenging and defining issue from the
beginning.

This chapter discusses the policy contexts of the problem. Policy
matters because governments have defined, regulated and largely funded
the communications sector in remote Australia, and because governments
continue to play a paternalistic role, albeit a contested one, in
Indigenous citizens’ lives. But these two policy registers –
communications and Indigenous affairs – have very different histories,
institutional settings and policy languages. Communications has been a
core Commonwealth responsibility, and a reasonably important agency,
under different guises, since Federation. Despite many large changes in
structure and policy, this is a field where the Commonwealth has long
been certain of its role. Indigenous Affairs, by contrast, is a much
more difficult, arduous and wicked problem, which has involved
continuing inter-governmental skirmishes as to the division of
responsibilities. Unlike communications, the Commonwealth’s work in
Indigenous affairs has failed to find any ongoing institutional
location, with successive shifts from a dedicated department to the
Indigenous-elected Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
(ATSIC), an element within social services, and most recently an
anomalous, operational wing of the Prime Minister’s department. Far from
heralding the progress of Indigenous affairs to the center of national
public administration, these migrations signal a volatile history of
reversals and revisions, where a lack of governmental confidence is
reflected above all in the scant regard paid to domain expertise,
experience or memory.[^33]

It should not be surprizing that these different administrative channels
have tangled relations, producing outcomes that occasionally connect but
generally bear little relation to one another. We must therefore make an
artificial distinction between the communication activities that
interest us, and the social settings in which they occur – not because
such a distinction is useful, but because the prism of public policy
frequently separates these elements, and treats them differently. We
start by considering communications, and then move to the Indigenous
policy domain.

### Issues and Imperatives for Remote Communications

If Australian governments have struggled to comprehend the needs and
circumstances of remote Australians, this is despite the fact that the
geography and social reach of communications has been a common thread in
policy and politics since Federation. And if Australia’s distinctive
human and physical geographies did not themselves make debates about
subsidizing rural and regional services an inevitable feature of policy
argument, the political economy of the settlements struck between the
new Australian states ensured it would be so. A national government
required, in effect, a single market for communications, whether these
were postal services, telegraphy, or phone calls. In the case of central
Australia, governments, rather than the market, have directly shaped
communications from the early colonial period. For our purposes, the key
developments are recent. Remote communications assumed a new and urgent
shape as a problem of contemporary public policy in the first decade of
the millennium, at the same time as broadband communications and the
mobile internet were becoming embedded in the everyday lives of
mainstream, urban Australians.

Understanding how that happened – and the outcomes for remote
communities – involves recognizing two connected processes of policy
change that were well underway at this time. First, there was a process
of digital transformation, driven not only by technical advances in
infrastructure, devices and applications, but, most importantly, by how
governments and others responded to new communications technologies.
From the 1980s onwards, new communications had undermined confidence in
the longstanding model of a government-owned monopoly provider. Then, as
mobile and the internet took off, social services, health and community
services, education, entertainment, work and commerce began to be
redesigned on the assumption that national populations would have access
to the necessary infrastructure at an affordable price, and would have
the skills and motivations to make use of it. This dynamic had many
benefits, while presenting a critical problem, but also an opportunity,
for those not online. One effect was to emphasize the increasing
relative disadvantage of those Australians without broadband or reliable
mobile coverage. While steadily increasing numbers of Australians went
online, the question of how to assist and support those without good
communications did not diminish in corresponding fashion; instead it
grew in importance as a matter for policy and politics.

The second formative change underway over this period was the
liberalization of the telecommunications industry, framed by a new,
competitive, regulatory model, the incremental sale of Telstra from 1997
onwards, and the subsequent planning and establishment of the NBN. This
is not the place for a full review of this history, but we should
briefly focus on two turn-of-the-century policy imperatives: the Telstra
sale, and the creation of a competitive market for telecommunications.
In micro-economic terms, there was no simple relation between these.
Paul Keating’s Labor government had been more concerned with fostering
competition, particularly through the entry into the market of Optus as
a second carrier. The Coalition government led by John Howard
prioritized the sale; as it transpired, the effect of that was not more
competition, but the consolidation of Telstra’s position as a dominant
market player combining control of the infrastructure with a pre-eminent
position in retail. This market problem was a key factor in the later
development of the National Broadband Network (NBN). At a political and
social level, the sale required the support of regionally-based
politicians, both within the National Party and outside it. These
politicians and their constituencies were motivated by a strong sense of
rural and regional disadvantage, and were not naturally inclined to
support the disposal of a public enterprise.

On the strength of objections from rural and regional interests,
legislation to complete the full sale of Telstra failed in the Senate in
1998. A staged approach, a series of regular reviews, funded programs
and accommodations were then necessary for the government to proceed
with further public offerings of Telstra shares. The sale was therefore
a gradual process, but it represented a slow-motion conclusion to a long
period of public control over Australia’s chief communications networks,
and the commencement of an ongoing and unstable period of regulation,
review and subsidy. A proliferation of large and small publicly-funded
schemes, generally short-term, were devised to meet the needs of those
users who could not be provided for by market forces alone. It is
important to note that the question of communications services for
Indigenous communities came into focus through this particular optic:
the perspective of a larger population of telecommunications users,
including consumers, businesses, and public entities, who were captured
under the rubric of rural, remote and regional Australia. This
positioning gave Indigenous organizations – increasingly capable as
sources of policy innovation over this period – a voice and a place at
the communications policy table, where the ‘adequacy’ and ‘equitable’
distribution of services was at issue.

The mobilization of diverse interests in ‘regional telecommunications’
did not always translate into well-directed initiatives: the term has
always struggled to cohere the wide range of experiences, problems and
situations of all those excluded from mainstream urban infrastructure.
From the first regional telecommunications inquiry in 2000 to the
present, Indigenous voices have had to emphasize the particularity of
circumstances in their societies. Submissions consistently argue the
need to design and implement programs with community involvement, and
with on-the-ground knowledge of the conditions and circumstances. As
this book argues, basic categories that have passed largely unconsidered
in mainstream communications, such as the role of communities, or the
continuity of the household as a stable organization for the consumption
of services, have generally demanded far more careful thought when
placed in an Indigenous context.

Nevertheless, a patchwork of major and minor initiatives followed from
1997 onwards, many of them in direct response to the now-regular cycle
of regional communications reviews. While most estimates in this period
considered around 2 per cent of Australians to be living in locations
where commercial communications services were not viable, a considerable
amount of public funding supported services beyond that roughly-defined
group. Several different approaches were at work. For instance, general
purpose grants were offered by Networking the Nation (1997-2004), which
used \$250million in proceeds from the sale of Telstra to support
improved telecommunications for regional, rural and remote communities.
Customer subsidies, intended to offset the greater cost of services
outside the cities, were offered through Broadband Connect (2005), a
\$900million four-year program then replaced by the Australian Broadband
Guarantee (2007-2011), which funded internet service providers to offer
a basic broadband service for remote users.

More targeted programs have focussed on remote Indigenous community
needs. The Telecommunications Action Plan for Remote Indigenous
Communities (TAPRIC) (2002), Backing Indigenous Ability (2007-10) and
the successor Indigenous Communications Program (ICP) funded community
projects. Much of the funding in these programs was dedicated to the
provision of public payphones. According to the 2005-2006 Budget,
TAPRIC’s initiatives sought ‘to overcome a number of complex logistical
and social factors affecting the provision of basic telephone services
in remote Indigenous communities’.[^34] TAPRIC funded the Community
Phones Program, which rolled out public phones designed by the Centre
for Appropriate Technology (CAT) for the specific needs of remote
communities. It also involved a stocktake of the existing infrastructure
in remote communities, drawing on Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS)
survey data.

Alongside these specific-purpose programs, a number of longer-term
responses to regional disadvantage in a liberalized system were enacted,
with lasting consequences. Concerns about consumer safeguards were
addressed through a service guarantee, designed to ensure that
telecommunications providers repaired faults and dealt with problems in
timely manner. Telstra, as the dominant network operator, has been
funded to provide, among other public interest services such as
payphones, a standard telephone service (STS) under a Universal Service
Obligation (USO).

The USO has been an ongoing topic of debate in Australia, particularly
in regard to its impact on competition, what should be included in the
USO, and its susceptibility to political interests.[^35] In theory, a
USO is a market design mechanism that works to transfer some of the
consumer surplus from one group as an implicit subsidy to another group
by effectively forcing a monopoly provider to treat them all as a single
market, and by prohibiting price discrimination. A core rationale for
the USO in Australia is to provide access to telecommunications for
those residing outside cities. The result should be that everyone
receives the same supply and pays the same price: the USO thus imposes a
kind of transfer from urban to remote consumers via a single provider.
However, this has not been the reality.

The policy problems of the USO have emerged gradually, but are now
manifold and prominent. First, Telstra has not seen the USO as extending
to remote services, especially for smaller communities, thereby creating
the need for a succession of gap-filling programs. Consumers in remote
Australia are generally not able to access landlines (the STS) as the
cost of cables and trenches is still borne by the consumer (and are
prohibitive).

Second, the STS is conceived in terms of specific technologies and
services, which are of diminishing relevance everywhere, and especially
in remote Australia[^36]. It cannot then reflect the evolving needs of
communications users, which now extend well beyond basic telephony, or
the rollout of new broadband networks that do not rely on Telstra’s
copper infrastructure. Voice services are increasingly used through
internet applications that are more flexible, and cheaper than the STS,
with support for video, messaging and other functions. But internet
access is not part of the USO. Mobile cellular services are vital for
network access, but neither are these the focus of the USO. Indeed, the
failure of the USO model brings into focus one of the central arguments
of this book: the need for a more flexible policy framework for ensuring
continuing funding for uneconomic services, and which can respond to
local community circumstances and preferences.

The election of the Rudd Labor government in 2007 marked a shift away
from the cycle of end-user subsidy schemes towards a more ambitious
rethinking of Australia’s communications system. The NBN was conceived
as a universally-accessible high-speed network that would ensure
Australia’s place in the future ‘digital economy’. It was intended as a
general solution to regional and remote disadvantage, through a uniform
pricing structure and advanced satellite and fixed wireless services for
those households and premises beyond the reach of viable fibre
infrastructure. But the network also embodied a micro-economic reform
agenda, with NBN’s neutral wholesale role taking over from Telstra’s
compromised position in the market, and a service design that would
encourage and enable a more diverse range of large and small
retailers.[^37]

For remote communities, the rollout of the NBN meant the closure of the
Broadband Guarantee scheme – which had not in any case been easy to
access (see Chapter 2) – and the introduction of an ‘interim satellite
service’ (ISS), replaced in 2016 by the much greater-capacity ‘long term
satellite solution’ (LTSS), using two new satellites. The ISS was
rapidly fully subscribed, and attracted considerable criticism in the
2011 and 2015 regional telecommunications reviews. Bodies such as the
Flying Doctor Service drew particular attention to the inability of the
service to support time-critical applications such as remote medical
consultations.[^38] While the long-term solution is likely to
considerably improve the performance of the satellite-delivered NBN, the
2015 review forecast a rapid growth in use, and recommended a number of
measures to improve the service.

While the NBN will provide a more capable source for the internet on the
outstation, it has long been clear that there cannot be any single
infrastructure ‘fix’ for the digital divide in remote Australia. The ICP
was intended to be a targeted supply and maintenance program for fixed
community phones, mobile satellite phones for very small communities
(oddly not covered by the USO), and equipment and training for internet
access. The program evolved in interesting ways, reflecting the
evolution of communications in the bush from basic telephony to the
broader range of internet-enabled services, and from simple shared
facilities, such as payphones, to a more varied ecology of mobile
devices. So while the ICP began with a focus on payphones, over its
course we can see this infrastructure being re-conceptualized as
general-purpose internet access points, offering not only a phone but
also a wireless access point which could then be shared, with mobile
devices, across a group of users. The development and installation of
the phones, managed for the Department of Communications by Australian
Private Networks (2014), is a remarkable story of ingenuity, opportunism
and resourcefulness. The addition of the Wi-Fi capability to the
community phone was first trialed at the Laura Dance Festival on Cape
York in June 2011, and proved instantly popular. The festival organizer
reported later that she could not have run the festival without the
Wi-Fi.

As part of Labor’s ‘Closing the Gap’ strategy to redress Indigenous
disadvantage, internet access was also provided through a Commonwealth
funding agreement with the states and territories, the Remote Indigenous
Public Internet Access (RIPIA) National Partnership Agreement. In the
Northern Territory, the RIPIA contract was awarded to Northern Territory
Libraries. RIPIA reflected the broader social policy agenda of Closing
the Gap, and signaled a more developed and far-reaching set of concerns
than the earlier emphasis on ‘adequate’ communications and ‘equitable’
access. These new goals appear to reflect the more ambitious aspirations
of the early NBN period. Better internet access was understood
explicitly in terms of building economic and social capital in
communities. The objectives were to reduce barriers to services,
increase digital literacy and social inclusion, and economic, social and
political participation. It followed from this broad vision of the
benefits of the internet that, as well as establishing services,
maintenance and training would also be supported. This expansive agenda
cut in two ways. The social dimensions of internet access were also
reflected in a requirement that filtering mechanisms be in place for
‘illegal and offensive materials’. These provisions could well have
ameliorated community concerns about internet access; they also echoed
the more draconian and paternalistic tenor of those restrictions on
computer use that had been imposed under the Howard government Northern
Territory Emergency Response (NTER; ‘the Intervention’). However, the
RIPIA project was limited in what it could reasonably achieve. Northern
Territory Libraries set out to provide access and training in forty
sites (the majority in the Top End, not the central desert region),
receiving only \$6,000 per annum per site for equipment, and a similar
amount for training (Broadband for the Bush Alliance, 2013). The program
was therefore not able to cater for small communities during the period
we are concerned with. In 2015 the national RIPIA program funding was
redirected into the Indigenous Advancement Strategy, amounting to
\$2.2million to provide ‘essential infrastructure such as computers,
printers and internet access points to improve internet literacy and
educational outcomes for children and adults in around seventy-five
remote communities’, and administered through a competitive grants-based
process.[^39]

What has been the result of these policy and program decisions? One
result has been that, for over a decade, the dominant mode of provision
was shared facilities, in the form of dedicated computer rooms or shared
computers in existing public spaces. Networking the Nation, TAPRIC, the
ICP and the RIPIA program have all incorporated this approach to varying
degrees.

The resulting facilities do appear to have been an important means for
internet access in some communities, at least in the early years. The
2001 census included questions that enabled A.E. Daly to estimate the
difference between home internet use and internet use ‘generally’, which
might include access at a community center, library, workplace or
home.[^40] She found that internet use for Indigenous people living
outside the capital cities in South Australia and the Northern Territory
was three times higher than home use, which was not the case for the
non-Indigenous population. (From 2006 onwards the census has only
measured internet access from private dwellings.)

In 2009 we undertook a survey of shared internet facilities in the
central Australia region. The research involved phone interviews with
supervisors or council workers in the thirty-four large communities in
central Australia (with a combined Indigenous population of 9,724, or 72
per cent of the Indigenous population of central Australia outside Alice
Springs) and visits to ten of those communities. From this we gathered
basic information, including whether centers existed, whether they were
in continuous use, the number of hours they were open, how the centers
were funded, user charges, internet speeds and download quotas, as well
as supervision arrangements. We also asked survey respondents to provide
anecdotal comment on the level and use of activities that occurred in
those sites. We found that while shared facilities have played an
important role in establishing communications infrastructure,
sustainability was a significant concern in many instances.[^41]

We found that less than half of the thirty-four communities had
community internet access and, of these, many were only semi-functional.
Thirteen communities had at least some working computers for community
use as of December 2009. Fourteen were without and four were under
development. We were unable to obtain information for three communities.
The computers were located in council offices, training centers,
Centrelink offices, remote Indigenous broadcasting stations (RIBS) and
schools. Many facilities were only semi-active, operating with part-time
or no supervision, or waiting on maintenance and upgrades.

In one community, there was a room in the council administration
building that had once been allocated and equipped with computers for
residents’ use, but at the time of survey the computing equipment had
been dismantled and the room given over to use as the community housing
office. This ICT center had not been operational for the past two years.
Another community was faring better with four operational computers of
varying ages, sharing satellite internet access with the council in a
room provided by the council in its administration building. However,
the room was only semi-active at the time of the survey, and there was
little in the way of training and mentoring support available to
residents. In another, one of the metropolitan universities was
sponsoring internet services in a small public computing building with
six computers, using volunteer supervisors where these could be
recruited to assist and train residents in using applications such as
email, music downloading and internet banking. However, maintaining a
steady flow of volunteers who were able to devote sufficient time to
settling into the community, gaining the confidence of the residents and
making a lasting contribution to their computer learning was difficult.
A town camp was awaiting four computers for their community building,
which would ultimately be connected by mobile internet with the
assistance of their council.

As these examples demonstrate, community media centers have encountered
major obstacles, and in general have only provided limited access. A
report from September 2003 for the then Department of Communications, IT
and the Arts, commissioned in response to the 2002 TAPRIC
recommendations, warned that Commonwealth and state-funded centers were
already at risk and unlikely to be viable without government
support.[^42] The report found that cooperative centers with a range of
stakeholders were more likely to succeed, as funding overheads could be
shared. Our survey confirmed this observation. Moreover, as discussed
below, government policy and funding, including for programs such as
RIPIA, has chiefly been directed to Indigenous communities with
populations greater than 300 people, the idea being that the residents
of smaller settlements will travel to larger towns to access services.
We had little evidence of residents of the three outstations making use
of shared computer rooms in other communities when we commenced in 2010.

In 2014 in the central Australia region, computer rooms were operating
at Papunya, Mt Alan, Laramba, Mt Liebig, Kintore, Harts Range, Lake
Nash, Areyonga, Amoonguna, Ikuntji, Docker River, Tjwanpa, Titjikala and
Papunya. The Yuendumu Computer Centre was closed, and Ali Curung’s
computer room was dormant. Although the shared facilities approach has
been fraught, there have been some notable successes. As discussed in
later chapters, we visited the Papunya Internet and Computer Room on a
couple of occasions to gauge how remote community members were using
computers and the internet at a known successful shared internet
facility. As of late 2015, that center had also closed.

### A Multiplicity of Programs and Reviews

The field of remote communications is characterized by an episodic
sequence of programs and reviews, each with different emphases and
developing in different ways. As mentioned above, many of these have
funded the establishment of facilities, but not their ongoing operation.
This was an issue addressed in the first regional telecommunications
review, when Besley argued that the ongoing costs of community
facilities could be supported by a proportion of the universal cost
attributable to the community.[^43] Many have funded access, but not
training, or training, but not the development of relevant content and
applications. Limited by the legacy of the ‘adequacy’ problem, they have
rarely approached digital engagement from the perspective of users, who
must deal with all of these dimensions of the new information and
communication services.

While policy reviews have raised the profile of this issue, their
frequency has encouraged a degree of policy churn. The reviews play a
useful ‘monitory’ function, holding governments and commercial parties
accountable. But they have also created a start-stop dynamic, and
fostered an environment where the longer-term research and evaluation
problems have been put to one side, while increasingly familiar advocacy
– from one sector or another – takes its place. Every review notes the
need for more research, but surprizingly little has been done. A better
approach, as the 2015 RTIRC suggests, would be to develop a more robust
set of indicators, especially regarding the spatial distribution of
facilities and services, and a more ambitious research program, aiming
for a systematic understanding of the patterns and dynamics of take-up
and use.[^44] With that in hand, frequent reviews should not be needed
for us to monitor effectively the performance of our networks, and the
benefits they may bring to remote communities.

### Governing Remote Communities

A feature of the governmental landscape around remote communities are
the discontinuities within and between different regulatory and policy
positions. There has been no ready trade in concepts, ideas or
objectives between communications policies on the one hand, and
Indigenous affairs on the other. While the NBN promised to provide
high-speed internet to Australians everywhere, other elements of
government concentrated service delivery into larger towns. While public
funds were being invested in encouraging computer skills, broadly-framed
restrictions were being implemented that controlled the use of computers
(in particular, restrictions under the NTER during the 2007-2011
period). At the beginning of this chapter, we spoke of the two registers
of policy: a communications approach, framed around ‘adequacy’ and
equity of access to services, and a more paternalistic Indigenous policy
approach with an emphasis on welfare and control. This simple contrast
certainly overlooks the diverse motivations and practices of government
in remote Australia. But it also prepares us for starkly different
approaches and orientations from different policy domains.

In terms of access to services, Aboriginal communities have a particular
character and plight in comparison with other localities with the same
remoteness status, due to the historical circumstances of their
formation. The larger Aboriginal communities, and some smaller ones that
predated the outstation movement, were not created as self-sustaining
towns, but were formed from Christian missions and ration stations under
policies to encourage centralization, forced sedentariness and
assimilation.

For instance, a senior woman at Imangara spoke to us of growing up at
Hatches Creek before the outstation was established. Her memories were
prompted by printouts from a website that someone at the Central Land
Council (CLC) had given her, which included an oral history by Joan
Deans, wife of the policeman who was based at the waterhole near Hatches
Creek. From 1913 until sometime in the 1970s, Hatches Creek was a mining
settlement, producing wolframite, a mineral used in the manufacture of
ammunition for the first and second world wars. She explained to us that
Warlpiri camped on one side of the waterhole and Alyawarr on the other.
They also worked in the mines, presumably alongside the Chinese
indentured workers mentioned on the website, and received rations. In a
separate conversation she mentioned that when she was a kid ‘everyone
was working’, and they had to wait in line to receive tea, brown sugar
and flour. Hatches Creek shrank to fewer than a dozen people after the
mines closed down, while other such communities grew into sizeable
townships.

From the 1970s, a fundamentally discriminatory legislative system began
to be challenged, and Indigenous Australians were granted citizenship
rights. Under the Whitlam government, the era of assimilation gave way
to new policies of self-determination, including what has been referred
to as the ‘outstation movement’.[^45] In the words of the Aborigines’
Progressive Association in 1968, returning land to Aboriginal people was
an ‘assuagement to hurt sensibilities’ that could restore Aboriginal
dignity.[^46] Policy papers from the time expressed an expectation that
a return to country would help overcome a ‘culture of poverty’, lead to
self-determination and provide Indigenous people with the power to
negotiate over use of land (for instance, with mining companies).

Those who returned to their country were able to access grants to build
sewerage systems, basic roads, water and electricity from 1972 –
infrastructure not intended to meet conventional standards, but to
provide assistance that would be supplemented by community efforts,
including the development of makeshift shelters or humpies.[^47] A
landmark development came in 1976 when the Fraser government passed the
Aboriginal Land Rights (NT) Act, which provided a legal mechanism for
Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory to reclaim their ancestral
lands, including direct transfer of missions and reserves to Aboriginal
freehold land, and the ability to fight for land that currently wasn’t
already claimed. Further development of outstations occurred through the
Community Development Employment Program (CDEP), a subsidized community
employment program, from the late 1980s. Funding for housing came later
during the late 1980s and in the 1990s through ATSIC when people could
prove their willingness to live remotely.

The Aboriginal Land Rights Act returned large areas of lands to the
Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory, although it only allowed
ability to claim unoccupied land. Half of the land mass in the Northern
Territory is now owned by Aboriginal people. The majority of outstations
are on Aboriginal land, although some are on excisions from pastoral
leases (known as Community Living Areas, CLA) or in national parks. The
outstations on CLAs form a critical part of the outstations, or
homelands, footprint, signalling how some groups remained connected to
their lands, despite appropriation of land by pastoralists.[^48] Two
outstations in this story, Mungalawurra and Kwale Kwale, are on
Aboriginal land, whereas Imangara is a CLA.

Outstations are thus settlements where the residents have a
descent-based affiliation, and recognized ownership over the land.
People returned to country in order to maintain traditional sites, to
fulfil their cultural obligations to manage land, and in some cases to
avoid political marginalisation in the larger settlements where the
artificial collocation of diverse groups had resulted in significant
stresses for those who were not traditional owners or who were
descendants of the minority language group. As time progressed,
outstations also had the appeal of being removed from the social
problems of larger settlements, such as alcohol and violence.[^49]

Today there are approximately 400 occupied outstations in the Northern
Territory, with a population of around 10,000 living in 2,400 dwellings
(about 25 per cent of the rural Aboriginal population of the Northern
Territory).[^50] In the public imagination, outstations have come to
represent ‘extreme living’, in the sense that they are isolated, with
limited access to services and little infrastructure, and are thus
represented as a choice to live apart from the majority in favor of
maintaining tradition.[^51]

In a submission to a 2003 review of outstation policy, CAT pointed out
that outstations have been subject to a coordination problem, falling
through the net of available services, with resource agencies struggling
to meet the costs of outstation operation, battling to extract user
contributions to such costs, and under pressure by the ad hoc nature of
funding programs.[^52] Such concerns regarding the coordination and
transparency of funding and programs to outstations continue to this
day. Some of the problems recounted to us by the communities reflect the
ongoing challenge of maintaining outstations.

When our project commenced in 2010, outstations had become the focus of
political contention around how best to overcome Indigenous
disadvantage. In July 2008, coinciding with the NTER and prior to our
first consultations, the Commonwealth began divesting itself of funding
responsibility for outstations, handing what was available to state and
territory governments[^53]. Some saw the move as reducing duplications
and creating economies of scale to provide services.[^54] The Northern
Territory government’s policy development – designed to coordinate
infrastructure and services and ‘set a new path for outstations’ –
received wide criticism. In Pat Dodson’s words, outstations were being
left to ‘wither on the vine’.[^55]

There was a growing inclination amongst some right-wing think tanks to
regard outstations as entrenching disadvantage and reducing people’s
opportunities. For instance, the demonization of location was apparent
in the Commonwealth Minister for Indigenous Affairs’ description of
remote communities and outstations as ‘cultural museums’, and in
commentator Helen Hughes describing the outstations movements as a form
of apartheid and a failed ‘socialist utopia’.[^56] Further, Gary Johns
argued that the residents of remote communities and outstations should
migrate to towns with greater employment opportunities.[^57]

Hughes’ and Johns’ ideas are likely to have been influential in the
policy shift away from supporting outstations and small communities
towards a focus on larger Indigenous communities, known as ‘priority
communities’ by the Council of Australian Governments (COAG), or ‘Growth
Towns’ in the Northern Territory. COAG’s National Partnership Agreements
saw new funding directed to ‘priority towns’, with both government
policies aiming to support a limited number of communities with
additional funding resources to the point where facilities would be
comparable with those in equivalent-sized regional towns. While the
Commonwealth and Northern Territory government groups were not
identical, there was a high degree of overlap, with a total of twenty
communities targeted in the Northern Territory, all of which had a
population upward of 300. The decision not to direct the new funding to
smaller communities and outstations was that the transport links between
the ‘hub’ target towns and the smaller communities in their sphere of
influence would be upgraded, with a view to encouraging and assisting
residents of these smaller communities to utilize the hub services.

New houses were built on the proviso that the prioritized communities
signed a lease, ensuring that the Commonwealth had responsibilities for
housing in Aboriginal communities. The lease arrangements were part of
government’s secure tenure policy, and allowed all community houses to
choose to transfer to a public housing model. Meanwhile, other remote
Indigenous Communities not classified as priority/growth towns or
outstations continued to receive funding targeted towards specific
services such as local government municipal services (power, water,
waste management, roads), health clinics, schools, and police stations.
They would also later be asked for a lease, so that their houses could
be renovated, upgraded or rebuilt (for houses deemed inhabitable[^58]).
Outstations continued to receive general-purpose infrastructure and
service funding through a network of outstation resource agencies and
shire/regional councils, which were in turn funded by the Northern
Territory government. In 2014-15, 423[^59] were funded under the
Northern Territory government’s homeland programs for housing and
municipal and essential services. The Northern Territory government
asserted that the funding provided was making a contribution to living
in the outstations, recognizing that funding was insufficient to meet
all the service and infrastructure needs of residents. There were no new
houses for outstations, and the previous ATSIC moratorium of new
outstations remains in place.

While the significant increase in funding was welcomed by large
communities that were categorized as priority communities, the policy
created uncertainty in funding, programs and service delivery
arrangements with respect to the great many communities that were not
captured in the priority/growth town policies. There was also evidence
within the COAG documents that governments were trying to encourage
people into larger settlements, a policy shift that came to be known as
‘mainstreaming’. As Moran articulated at the time, such policies of
coercing people did not fit well historically as a development policy
for remote Indigenous communities.[^60]

The policy effectively established a hierarchy of communities in terms
of what should be developed and sustained. For some, the issue was one
of unequal access to basic services, shelter and support that should be
considered an entitlement for all citizens ‘that should not be
contingent on geographic location, at least in any policy sense’.[^61]
The mainstreaming approach was also ‘premised on utilizing standardized
structures and processes for delivering and managing’ housing and
infrastructure that did not take into account the particular nuances of
outstation needs.[^62]

Further, Sanders analyzed the populations that would be serviced under
the growth towns policy, demonstrating that there was a significant gap
for central Australia regions in particular, where at best only 18 per
cent of the population were likely to be captured within the ‘hub and
spoke’ of the twenty priority communities.[^63] Even with the best
transportation options between these large communities and their
surrounding smaller communities, there was a significant lack of service
coverage for many communities.

We observed at the time that communications policy and Indigenous policy
were largely disconnected from each other.[^64] The one exception is
education, in that schools in Indigenous communities do have internet
access, and have been the beneficiaries of various ICT programs in
recent decades, as discussed in Chapter 6. At the local level –
regardless of policy – communications and other infrastructures,
including housing and power, are dependent on each other.

### Houses and Community Infrastructure

The average house in a remote Indigenous community will have a lifecycle
of four to eight years, will use about a third of the power of a
suburban home, is six times more likely to be overcrowded than other
Australian houses, and will have three times more dogs.[^65] In 2014,
CAT undertook a survey at the Utopia Homelands as part of a \$4million
commitment by the Commonwealth Government to improve living conditions.
In that report, Grey-Gardner and Young observe that residents preferred
box air-conditioners over more robust models, because some families
lived between three or four houses, taking the aircon with them.[^66]
Such observations are typical in reports by CAT, an organization that
takes into account the social life of infrastructure and objects in its
development and maintenance projects. The physicality of the outstation
house, its occupants and uses, were thus also integral to understanding
‘home internet’. We carefully documented the use of computers and
internet in relation to household dynamics and other community
infrastructures and utilities.

On our second visit to one community, the residents of three separate
houses were living under one roof. The taps were not working in one
house, and there was no power in the other (perhaps a decision to
economize on power bills rather than a power fault). The elderly couple
that usually occupied the house on their own told us they were
considering moving to a ‘humpy or tent’ because the house was so
crowded. A few months later they had moved into a caravan, given to them
by the Church.

As they were inundated with family members, they thought it unwise to
have a computer in the house as it would mean people would spend more
time indoors. In other instances, we observed that overcrowding was
temporary, until another house was repaired. As discussed in Chapter 4,
residents moved into different houses over the course of the project.

From the start we were made aware of the issue of power usage, which
seemed something of a deterrent for some residents in their decision
whether to have a computer. Each community had a different arrangement
for utilities. Mungalawarru has solar power with a back-up generator,
and water is supplied via a bore on the land trust. The community houses
and shed in Kwale Kwale are serviced by mains power and water supply
from Power and Water, except for one outlying house in the settlement
with solar power. Imangara has a generator for power supply, shared with
the pastoral station and school, and water is supplied from a nearby
bore on the pastoral station.

Power bills for all purposes at Kwale Kwale and Imangara were a
significant expense at around \$50 a month (higher during winter). To
receive power, residents need to purchase a power card from a store and
insert it into a meter. They were thus very aware of their power usage,
telling us that they were conscious not to use too many appliances. Some
were concerned that having a computer would significantly increase their
power costs. As it turned out, power became more of an issue when
computers were located in shared spaces, as people did not necessarily
contribute to purchasing ongoing power cards for these buildings.

We delve further into the dynamics of housing, bills and other
infrastructure issues in Part Two of this book. These were to become
important for understanding household decision-making in relation to the
internet, and revealed how the physical circumstances that have marred
remote communications from the start continue to manifest at the level
of everyday contemporary household routines, inconveniences and
capacities. We conclude this chapter with a brief description of each of
the communities.

### Kwale Kwale

Kwale Kwale is a small family outstation situated on the Iwupataka
Aboriginal Land Trust, approximately 40 kilometers west of Alice
Springs. The community is nestled near the foot of the MacDonnell Ranges
(an area known as Tjoritja to its Traditional Owners) in rugged and
varied desert landscape. Kwale Kwale is one of twelve or so family
homelands across the land trust, residents of which descend from four
main family groups. Most residents speak Western Arrernte and Luritja.
Kwale Kwale has twelve to fifteen permanent residents, with the majority
of these descending from one family group. When we first started
visiting the outstation, it was also populated by scores of peacocks,
kept as pets by the senior women. The free-roaming menagerie had
successfully intimidated the local dogs into submission.

The outstation has six houses (not including an old burnt-out house) and
a large shed with concrete floors and a veranda, with the indoor space
divided into three rooms. One room of the shed was being used as a
chapel during this period; the others for various purposes.

Two of the remaining houses stand at a distance from the others, and
were occupied by residents not related to the family. One was being used
as a youth respite service for troubled youths, run by an older
Aboriginal man. The program was taking on youth with law and justice
problems, and providing rehabilitation for them away from town. A single
Aboriginal man, who was employed in town but enjoyed living remotely,
occupied the other house.

### Imangara

Imangara is 207 kilometers by road south east of Tennant Creek, 30
kilometers past Ali Curung. The community has a permanent residency of
around eighty residents, who are primarily descendants of five main
family groups from the region. The residents mostly speak Alyawarr, but
also Kaytetye. The community has eleven houses and three sheds, which
are permanently occupied by family groups. As discussed below, there are
also other community facilities, including a women’s center and a
school.

Imangara is a CLA located on the Murray Downs pastoral station. When
land rights were granted, those whose country was being used by others
for agricultural purposes were left out. CLAs were designed to overcome
that by excising land from pastoral leases so that the traditional
owners might live there. The Imangara excision was granted in 1979 in
recognition of the close ties that a number of Alyawarr families have
with the surrounding country. The fenced living area is 84.72 hectares,
located 2 kilometers east of Murray Downs homestead. Over the years that
we visited, Imangara cycled through hard times and good times. Dwellings
were abandoned, and then later some old houses were repaired and new
ones built. Grasses would grow dangerously high at times, and be
susceptible to fires. Personal tragedies gutted what had seemed a
cohesive township, followed by what seemed a spike in religious
activities such as gospel music and church services.

### Mungalawurru

The Mungalawurru community lies approximately 80 kilometers from Tennant
Creek on the Karlantijpa North Aboriginal Land Trust (ALT), along with
the homelands of Napagunpa, Blue Bush, Kumunu and Kalumpurlpa, which are
all to the north of Mungalawurru. The land trust was established in the
1980s. To the south of Mungalawurru is Karlantijpa South ALT, west is
Central Desert ALT, and to the east Phillip Creek pastoral station and
the old Warrego gold mine site. Mungalawurru lies on a flat plain in
spinifex country. A few trees have been planted for shelter at one end
of the community, but otherwise the outstation is exposed to high winds
and hot sun. At times, blue-green puddles appeared on the road into
Mungalawurru, formed from sulphur used to neutralize cyanide from the
tailings dam. The road into the community is bitumen for two-thirds of
the drive, but the last third regularly became inaccessible in the rain.
We were forced to turn back on occasion, and the residents told us of
having to walk that 30 kilometers to the bitumen when they got cut off.

The community has close ties with other homelands on the land trust and
the land trust to the south, with many family members residing in
Tennant Creek, Mungkarta and Ali Curung. The residents primarily speak
Warlmanpa, but also Warumungu and Warlpiri. Mungalawurru is officially
home to approximately twenty-two permanent residents.

The Mungalawurru community residents have a close association with
Phillip Creek pastoral station and Warrego mine, which ceased production
in 1989. Many senior residents were students at the Warrego Mine School
before the mine closed down. Now the family’s school-aged children
reside in Tennant Creek.

The community has five occupied houses and twelve tin sheds, some of
which are used as houses and others as community facilities, including
an art shed and a health clinic.

### Conclusion

Indigenous social policy and communications policy have particular
histories and objectives, and have at times been contradictory in their
treatment of remoteness, including the viability of remote living, and
government’s responsibility to provide infrastructure to all
Australians. As the Australian Commonwealth moves towards a ‘digital by
default’ strategy of service provision, the issue of how those living in
remote Australia will access services online becomes more critical. In
the next chapter, we take a closer look at the notion of the digital
divide and discuss the practical aspects of bringing internet to the
outstations.

Chapter 2: Infrastructure
-------------------------

When we first visited the three outstations, only one house out of
twenty-four had an internet connection. A man at Kwale Kwale who was
living on the community with the permission of the traditional owners
had figured out that he could receive a tolerable mobile broadband
signal 40 kilometers from Alice Springs by taping a 3G stick modem to a
pole on his roof, connected to his computer by a long ethernet cable.
His house was located a kilometer from the main cluster of houses, and
his solution had gone unnoticed by others at Kwale Kwale, as he did not
interact much with the family. Four years later, fifteen households in
the three communities had home internet connections, received via
domestic satellite dishes planted on the rooves of their houses. The
residents were paying for the internet through a retail service provider
under standard contracts. We had assisted them to sign up for the
services, but the decision to acquire the services was entirely their
own.

This chapter describes the decisions and steps that led to residents
accessing the internet at the outstations, and how these efforts fitted
within our research approach. We discuss the reasons for using a trial
approach to understanding a digital divide problem, and how the process
of providing computers and internet enabled us to test some policy
assumptions around the most effective or most culturally-appropriate
forms of access. Although on the surface our approach resembles previous
studies that have occurred in the area of information and communications
technology (ICT) for development, we explain how our motivations and
actions differed somewhat from that particular field of research. In the
second half of the chapter, we provide a plain-language account of some
of the technical components of the project.[^67] Our interest in, and
documentation of, the material aspects of the hardware, as well as our
own interactions with the internet service providers, yielded important
insights into how infrastructure can frame social relations and
influence people’s digital choices.

### The Digital Divide

As discussed in the introduction, we set out to examine a digital divide
problem, in that we were interested in understanding what benefits, if
any, digital resources confer on individuals and groups, and whether
those who are *not* making use of them are disadvantaged as a result.
The term ‘digital divide’ has fallen in and out of favor amongst media
studies researchers since it first emerged in public discourse during
the 1990s. These debates are helpful in understanding the limits of
research on internet adoption and use, and informed how we carried out
our work.

The digital divide was first used as a measure of how the ‘Information
Society’ was progressing within and between nation states. Countries
began to measure computer and internet ownership as an indicator of
knowledge economy growth and competitive advantage. These exhaustive
statistical studies were based on a tradition of work on telephone
penetration, such as that developed by the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration (NTIA) in the United States, and the
emphasis on hardware and network reach was carried over to the analysis
of the social distribution of the internet. The NTIA positioned the
digital divide as physical access to computers by measuring the number
of households and individuals with a computer and internet connection,
and in 2002 declared the divide was largely overcome—‘we are truly a
nation online’—with the internet being used at work, schools, and
libraries as well as at home by over half of the American population,
and rising by two million new users a month.[^68]

However, by the early 2000s, a wave of scholarly attention had emerged
that refuted simplistic notions of the divide as referring to physical
access to computers. The ‘either you have access to ICT or you do not,
you are either connected or you are not’ approach, it was argued,
assumed that with enough resources and political will, the divide was
easy to close or bridge.[^69] Even with computers, some people did not
have the necessary skills or motivation to make use of them to the same
degree as others.[^70] Skills, autonomy of use (including where access
occurred), attitudes towards technology (relevance), and types of use
therefore became the main themes of digital divide research. The
refocused concern for the social dimensions of usage was considered ‘a
more elaborate and realistic understanding of inequalities in the
information age’.[^71]

Analyses of data sets drawn from many different countries have revealed
strong correlations between socio-economic status and internet adoption.
Some theorists have argued that as social disadvantages, such as low
income and lack of education, appear to be linked to the digital divide,
the divide can only be addressed by tackling those apparent causes –
effectively rendering the concept redundant, or at least unexceptional
as a singular policy concern.[^72] However, as Helsper notes, ‘there
remains significant debate around the existence, nature and causality of
these links’, a question we address directly in Chapter 9.[^73]

The most recent research on the digital divide seeks to know whether
internet use produces tangible outcomes, and whether unequal
distribution in the ways that people use the internet is reinforcing
existing inequalities. These studies are asking who benefits most from
being online in terms of economic, cultural, social and personal
wellbeing, and how this links to skills and online engagement.[^74]
Researching tangible outcomes requires establishing a hierarchy in the
nature or quality of use and mapping the opportunities people choose to
take up.[^75] For instance, online resources, such as being able to look
at job classifieds online, can translate into being able to find a job
through access to more opportunities. Studies of how people enact online
opportunities tend to support what is known as the *Matthew effect*,
whereby the rich get richer, or the *knowledge gap hypothesis*, which
posits that those with more resources gain skills and technologies
before others, thus reaping advantages sooner and increasing rather than
decreasing knowledge gaps in society.[^76] Van Duersen and van Dijk
found that in the Netherlands, where internet adoption is
near-ubiquitous (96 per cent of the population), capital-enhancing
online opportunities are more likely to be taken up by those with higher
education and income ‘which would accordingly reinforce their already
strong positions in society’.[^77] However, some groups defy prediction,
displaying high levels of digital inclusion despite experiencing other
disadvantages.[^78] As part of our research in the outstations, we
routinely asked people questions about their internet use, as well as
what they would like to learn to do in order to understand how the
residents responded to the opportunities of being online. Determining
whether Indigenous Australians living in remote areas were making
different choices from other Australians, and why, was one of the
central questions we set out to answer.

In attempting to research the digital divide in remote Aboriginal
communities, we were presented with some unique challenges. Many people
in remote communities had never used the internet when we commenced
(including the majority of adults in the three communities). While other
studies have moved on from basic questions of use versus non-use, this
was clearly still important to our research. Moreover, although most
countries possess longitudinal data on internet adoption and use that
enable statisticians to draw correlations between internet access and
other forms of social inclusion, as explained below, remote Indigenous
populations have been left out of many Australian data sets. We also had
serious doubts as to whether the questions being asked of other
population groups would tell us much about the dynamics of the digital
divide in remote Australia, given that unique factors were in play,
including cultural norms, extreme environmental conditions, and a
different range of opportunities. Therefore, although we undertook a
standard line of questioning around people’s online engagement, their
attitudes towards technologies and their skills, we set out to examine
these in relation to daily life in remote communities.

### Researching the Digital Divide in Remote Australia

Digital inclusion research has mostly been conducted through sample
surveys, such as the World Internet Project.[^79] These studies show
that although the digital divide in Australia is narrowing, it is doing
so increasingly slowly.[^80] However, sample surveys of internet use in
Australia have bypassed remote Aboriginal communities due to the
obstacles posed by lack of landlines (generally used to administer
surveys), as well as language and cultural barriers. There is also no
current data on ICT infrastructures in remote communities, which
prevented us from providing an in-depth analysis of adoption in relation
to different kinds of internet programs and services nationwide (see
Chapter 9 for an analysis of mobile adoption in the central Australia
region). Although ICT infrastructure was included in the Community
Housing and Infrastructure Needs Survey (CHINS), the last CHINS
collection occurred in 2006, and the survey has since been
discontinued.[^81] A key report on internet in remote communities
produced by the Australian Communications and Media Authority (the
communications regulator), published in 2008, relied heavily on this
data. Telstra’s Telecommunications Action Plan for Remote Indigenous
Communities (TAPRIC) data (see Chapter 1) is not publicly available.

For this reason, we restricted our analysis of available statistics to
the central Australian region, where we were able to determine available
infrastructure through our networks. As described in Chapter 9, the
census provides a limited amount of information related to the internet.
However, we gained insight into variations in adoption by examining how
2011 census data on households’ internet connections corresponded to our
own knowledge of types of internet available.

As so little research had been conducted on internet adoption and use in
central Australia, we were conscious that measures typically used to
gauge ‘high versus low order’ internet use would not necessarily apply.
Determining whether the internet was used for job searches, for
instance, says little about digital inclusion when there are no jobs
nearby (or where employers are not using the internet to promote those
jobs that are available). Understanding the tangible outcomes of
internet use thus required significant engagement with communities to
understand their particular circumstances and priorities, which we
undertook across a four-year time-frame. As Correa and Pavez note in
their study of first encounters with the internet in remote
(non-Indigenous) communities in Chile, ‘geographic isolation makes the
social context more decisive in any action or decision’, and digital
inclusion is a process that involves ‘multiple dimensions such as
technological access, skills, different uses, social contexts and
support’.[^82]

Tim Rowse has observed that, when used in policy contexts, statistics
can create a ‘regime of truth’ that overrides the lived realities and
dynamics of remote communities.[^83] Economist Amartya Sen makes a
similar point in relation to social exclusion.[^84] Exclusion, he
argues, needs to be understood in terms of the causal process, which
requires an understanding of the social context. Sen’s capabilities
approach is a useful framework for considering the digital divide, as it
asks what substantive freedoms people possess given the constraints
placed upon them, and about their ability to enact the outcomes that
they value.[^85] We found that particular deprivations can be difficult
to understand when encountering individuals in remote communities when
no background information is available. For instance, on an early visit,
we asked a man if he was living in the community, and whether he was
interested in having the internet in his house. He replied that he did
not have a house and was living in the ‘windbreak’ – a makeshift shelter
of branches and found objects in someone else’s yard. Whether the man
was permanently living an itinerant lifestyle – having fallen through
the cracks of welfare and housing – or whether his circumstances were
the result of the ‘temporary mobility’ discussed in Chapter 4, changes
the meaning, duration and consequences of what we might consider to be a
hardship. Putting up with inadequate shelter because of a willing
decision to visit relatives is different to not being able to afford
accommodation, or being excluded from a public housing register. As Sen
writes, ‘The issue, ultimately, is what freedom does a person have –
everything considered. It should come as no surprise that a person’s
deprivation can have diverse origins and may take disparate forms’.[^86]

For Rowse, the appropriate unit of analysis is not comparison between
statistically-identifiable groups, but an understanding of how a group
of people in a particular place is ‘doing well or doing badly in ways
that are specific to region and cultural heritage’.[^87] Although we
were not able to conduct a nationwide investigation of internet in
remote communities, in conducting our qualitative research on the three
outstations (complemented by two case study investigations in two larger
towns), we were able to understand better what digital exclusion means
in relation to the specific circumstances of remote community life and
individual agency.

### Trials and Experiments

Neither can standard statistical approaches tell us about the
effectiveness of particular interventions. A different approach to
digital divide studies has been to provide ICT infrastructure where
there is none, and to measure the outcomes. The benefit of trials is
that they can produce insights into how a technology or system fares
within a social context. The small-scale intervention that we designed
was intended to examine a specific policy position, in that shared
internet facilities were presumed to be the most viable and appropriate,
and yet there was no evidence to support one form of internet access
over another (see Chapter 1). Moreover, only communities with a
population of over 300 people were eligible to apply for funding for
shared facilities at the time. By implementing our alternative policy
approach, we set out to understand whether shared facilities were the
most desirable and practical solution, and what might work in their
absence. If personal ownership and acquisition were possible, then
understanding what level of assistance and maintenance (if any) was
necessary could assist Indigenous organizations to develop their own
programs.

A small-scale trial of the kind that we embarked upon cannot be used to
make reliable predictions, as the results are specific to the time,
place and people involved. However, qualitative research of this kind
has the advantage of showing *why* a particular approach works, and of
providing insight into complex social dynamics. In the field of
education technology, some studies have attempted experimental research
using randomized controlled trials, whereby the intervention is applied
to a statistically-significant group, selected randomly, and compared to
a non-treatment group.[^88] Such approaches seek to show definitively if
an intervention works, and can provide strong evidence that can be used
to support and justify particular policy responses. Large randomized
controlled trials still require qualitative research in order to
understand how or why the particular outcome has occurred. While
valuable, the experimental approach is not usually practical when
working with Indigenous communities, where the processes of consent and
consultation can preclude random selection, and where projects need to
be adaptive to accommodate community concerns and needs.

The Home Internet Project trial involved three stages. The first
involved consultation with the outstations and a baseline study. On our
first visits to the communities in 2010, the Central Land Council (CLC)
and the Centre for Appropriate Technology (CAT) made initial contact and
consulted with community members, at which time the elders agreed to the
project. During our early meetings with the communities, we carefully
documented their prior use of ICTs, and tried to ascertain what they
perceived to be the barriers to ICT uptake, and the opportunities
available through having computers and internet access (see below).[^89]
In the second phase, from 2011, we monitored the issues as they
unfolded, and carried out research in two larger communities in order to
compare home internet with other types of access. CAT provided a total
of twenty computers and associated satellite services connecting all
computers to the internet in Kwale Kwale (four), Mungalawurru (five) and
Imangara (eleven)[^90]. Aside from the research fieldtrips, CAT
researchers also carried out regular ICT training and maintenance
support in the communities for two years from the commissioning of the
facilities. In the mid-phase of the project, we extracted usage data
from a small number of computers (with the owners’ permission) to
confirm that the computers were in fact being used in the way we were
told. We also broke off into teams to conduct case studies in two larger
communities, one with a successful shared internet facility (Papunya),
and the other with mobile coverage (Ali Curung). The case studies proved
important in that they enabled us to compare home satellite internet
with other infrastructures. In the third phase, from the end of 2013, we
assisted the households to set up internet services (where desired), and
documented the transition. Participants were given the choice to
maintain internet access by paying for their own plans under a
government-subsidized program, the National Broadband Network (NBN)
Interim Satellite Solution (ISS). We continued to visit the communities
in 2014 in order to understand how the households were faring with their
own internet services. That final stage of the research, where
households decided whether to transition to the NBN and to maintain
their own services, was revealing, providing important insights into how
the government’s solution to providing internet to remote areas was
failing this particular group (see part III).

Much of our time during our research visits was spent traipsing from
house to house, checking up on the computers, providing people with
fresh paper, inks and accessories, as well as responding to requests for
on-the-spot training in ICT skills and applications. We became the
technical help – the IT support – performing mundane tasks to remove a
frustration and return things to normality. Those of us who were less IT
proficient were asked to help set up accounts, but we also learnt to
blow the red dust off a circuit board, and check for first principles
(cords plugged in, power supply on). These ad hoc house visits were as
informative for us as they were for the residents, giving us a snapshot
of how different individuals were learning how to use the computer, how
they maintained the computer, and what these factors might say about the
relative value of ICTs in the outstations.

Our research approach thus involved a degree of ethnographic
observation, but accrued through short visits of a day or two duration
every six weeks or so in each community. CAT and CLC had a great deal of
background knowledge of the families and communities, and received
information through their extensive networks of events that occurred
during the trial period. Such information was useful in helping us to
avoid intruding on the communities during difficult or inconvenient
times, although sometimes our information networks failed us (the worst
example being when we showed up the same day a coffin was delivered).
The following chapters draw on such information, but this book should
not be taken as a full anthropological account of these communities; nor
do we think such an approach was necessary. As the project progressed,
we became increasingly aware that a less-intrusive approach was
sufficient, and perhaps preferable, for understanding the digital
divide, partly as it was easiest to discuss computers in our roles as
helpers.

### ICT for Development

On the surface, our approach resembled what is known as ICT for
development (ICT4D), in that we were introducing a technology to a
population that was largely going without. Although the findings and
critique of ICT4D is useful in considering the dynamics and outcomes of
our work, we do not locate our approach in this field of research.
Instead, the trial occurred in what we see as a trajectory of media and
communications projects initiated in remote communities through
Indigenous organizations in collaboration with researchers.

Development communications (or ‘communications for development’ or
‘development for social change’) has a long history that we do not have
space to recount here.[^91] The practice of development communications
generally involves an external agency operating within a situation of
need, where this role cannot be performed by the community, or by the
government agencies charged with serving it. These projects are based on
the rationale that communications technology is integral to social and
material advancement in order to facilitate the exchange of ideas in a
well-functioning society, and to overcome inequities in access to
information. Development communications has been widely critiqued for
overlooking the inherently social aspects of communication technology,
and for assuming that technical and administrative solutions can
overcome structural and political inequalities.

ICT4D is a variant on development communication, in that it moves away
from development as merely an outside aid program, to something that
could be entrepreneurial and work in harmony with corporate and national
economic aspirations.[^92] ICT4D has a tendency to assume that ICT is
inherently ‘meta-enabling technology that will bypass all institutional
and infrastructural obstacles’, providing unlimited opportunities for
social and economic development.[^93] Those at the ‘bottom of the
pyramid’ are assisted to improve their circumstances through online
engagement and enterprise. Early iterations of ICT4D argued in favor of
shared facilities, which were considered to ‘take advantage of economies
of scope’, as they aggregated demand across an entire community, ‘thus
reducing costs, while increasing traffic and helping to integrate the
facility into the social fabric of the community’.[^94]

Faye Ginsburg has critiqued the ‘neo-developmental’ logic of the digital
divide framework generally, arguing that Indigenous peoples in
particular are often depicted as ‘waiting, endlessly, to catch up to the
privileged West’ on the technological front.[^95] Traditional peoples
are thus treated as existing in a separate time, not just place, from
the mainstream. As Mazarella points out, the ‘insistence that computers
come later’ perpetuates the assumption that technology should be
evaluated in terms of a hierarchy of needs that can be known in
advance.[^96] He asks, ‘What if the power of a medium is as much
performative as it is functional – that is to say, what if it brings
about its effects as much through the desires people invest in it as
through its ability to deliver predefined utilities?’[^97]

Mazarella’s question is important. As explored in Chapter 1, overcoming
Indigenous disadvantage has been a contentious and highly-politicized
field in recent years. The digital divide can appear as a minor concern
in contrast to pressing disparities in health and education, or housing
needs. However, the possibilities and outcomes of communication
technologies are less easy to anticipate and to measure.

We did not see our project as an ICT4D project because we were working
with and through Indigenous organizations with long track records in
service delivery and infrastructure. CAT in particular performs a
watchdog function, starting from a research perspective of determining
what works and why before providing services. In the years preceding our
project, CAT had been directly involved in government community ICT
initiatives, including the development and implementation of an
alternative community phone project that provided over 250 pay phones to
remote communities. The phone operated with pre-paid cards, and was
built from the electronic components of readily-available domestic
Telstra phones to enable cheap and easy replacement, encased in a
stainless steel shell that protected it from damage.[^98] The CAT phone
became known as the ‘NED phone’ due to its likeness to Ned Kelly’s
armour.[^99] During the period within which the home internet trial took
place, other Indigenous organizations, including the Indigenous Remote
Communications Association and its member groups, were striving to bring
their board members into the NBN debate, and building knowledge and
alliances within communities.

Government agencies that serve remote communities are not necessarily
incentivized to commit to small-scale initiatives, particularly trials
where the outcome is unknown (the APN community phones WiFi project
being an exception). The history of communications in remote Indigenous
Australia reflects this, whereby many innovations have occurred
‘pre-policy’ and in an ad hoc fashion through the efforts of the
Indigenous sector, including broadcast infrastructure, screen and radio
production, high-frequency (two-way) radio networks, satellite
television and videoconferencing. Indigenous-owned organizations,
together with local leaders, have carried out these experiments, aided
(and in some cases generated) by non-Indigenous workers from the
education and media sectors. The enterprises and infrastructures of
remote media and communication have thus arisen from two cultural
traditions operating together within the one settler state.[^100] This
is not to say that our presence in the communities was unproblematic –
for us or the residents – but only to recognize, as Melinda Hinkson
writes, that the sometimes-uneasy coming together of two traditions is
the ground upon which the Indigenous communications industry has been
built.[^101]

### Prior Experience with the Internet

What was the nature of internet access when we began? There were six
computers to be found across the three communities when we started,
including the one house with an internet connection mentioned at the
opening of this chapter. Not all of the computers belonged to those
residing in the communities – at least two were on loan or gifted from
people outside of the community. In our early conversations with
forty-eight of the residents (about 50 per cent of the adult population
of the three communities combined), we learnt that over half had used a
computer at some point in the past. However, only two-thirds of those
who had used a computer had also used the internet, and three-quarters
of internet uses were aged 30 or under. Those in the 30-45 age bracket
were most likely to have used a computer, but not the internet.

Although none of the communities had mobile coverage, approximately 30
per cent of people we spoke to had purchased mobiles for use in town.
Some mobiles had been given to school-aged relatives who were staying in
town, so that the children could ring the community payphone when they
needed to contact home. A third of mobile owners were aware of, or
using, their mobile for internet access – mostly for music downloads
and/or chat – which amounted to 10 per cent of everyone we spoke to. One
woman had accessed the internet on a mobile phone, but had never
accessed the internet from a computer. She was to become one of the most
frequent users of the internet.

Approximately one-third of those without a computer said that either
they didn’t know how to use it, or had never considered getting one.
This last group generally had very little knowledge of what a computer
could be used for, and some older people asked us to explain what we
meant by the words ‘computer’, ‘laptop’ and ‘internet’ – questions that
left us stammering for non-technical descriptions. One man had seen
twitter feeds on television programs, and grasped that it enabled people
to participate in conversations, but wanted to know how that worked.

As discussed in later chapters, there was significant interest in
getting computers, primarily for kids schooling, entertainment, and for
some cultural and enterprise activities. However, there were also
significant doubts around affordability, the security of the equipment
and language barriers.[^102] As the few individuals who owned a
computer, or had owned one in the past, were conscious of who they
allowed to use the computer, these computers were not necessarily
available to others. One young man kept his laptop locked away when he
was not using it. Having only a small number of computers in a community
also created annoyances for owners, mostly from others who wanted ‘to
put songs on their mp3 players’. A woman who owned a laptop was
protective of it, telling us that ‘people want to use it but I tell them
no because they might spoil it’. These conversations suggested that
there was not a critical mass of computers in the community for everyone
to experience computer use, and those that did exist were coveted
possessions. In the following chapter we explore how these dynamics of
ownership changed after the computers arrived.

It is important to consider that the residents had been living with
inadequate telecommunications, and that this perhaps influenced their
attitude to acquiring their own internet services. Out of the three
communities, only two homes had active telephone lines, both in the same
community (Kwale Kwale), and both in the homes of older people. One of
these phones had restrictions on it; they could receive calls but could
not make any charged calls, except by using a pre-paid phone card. Both
phones were initially installed to enable contact with medical services.
Imangara and Mungalawurru both had a single public payphone in an
outdoor cabinet. The distance to houses at the other end of the
community was up to 400 metres. Three older people in Imangara expressed
a desire for a home telephone: ‘\[We\] would like telephones. The one
here breaks a lot. I need a phone to ring family and friends in other
places’, an older woman told us. The older residents had limited
knowledge of what services they were entitled to, or what was available
for purchase. When asked how they would go about getting a telephone,
none was able to provide a straightforward answer. One woman said she
didn’t have a home phone because she ‘hadn’t been given one’. Others
said they would contact the council in the first instance, rather than a
telecommunications company. The elders in Imangara said that they would
like at least one public phone for each cluster of houses (‘camp’), as
it was too far to get to the telephone if someone was calling.

The attitude of waiting for external authorities to provide telephones
is unsurprising, given the way in which Australia’s USO has been
delivered, whereby consumers are entitled to services but must cover the
cabling costs themselves – costs that are beyond households or even
whole communities (Chapter 1). Satellite internet, however, was heavily
subsidized at the time, including installation costs. That households
had not sought out satellite internet, despite this being far more
affordable than home telephones, seemed peculiar to us – until we began
the process of installing satellite internet ourselves.

### Connecting to the Internet

Infrastructure is relational, in that different actors can have a very
different experience of it, whereby one person’s infrastructure is
another’s obstacle. Sandvig gives the example of a staircase, which is a
means of passage for most, but a barrier for someone in a
wheelchair.[^103] Moreover, infrastructure is not just the hardware and
technicalities, but also the rules, pricing and players that determine
who gets to use it. Communications infrastructure is thus tied up in
human experience, and evolves through planning, regulation, markets and
the networks between them. We began to examine closely who was
benefitting from communications infrastructure in remote communities, as
well as who was left out. The behavior of the infrastructure providers
when we began to install internet services was particularly
illuminating.

In early 2011, about a year after our initial meetings with the three
communities, installation began. During our initial scoping of the
project, we made the decision to provide internet in the most
cost-effective way, on the principle that whatever system we installed
would be the most affordable for the communities should they choose to
continue to keep the internet when the funding ran out.[^104]
Unfortunately, our low-cost model meant that we were providing limited
download capacity and speeds, but we felt that this was better than
providing the communities with services that would be expensive for them
to maintain at the conclusion of the project. The model we implemented
thus involved using as few satellite dishes as possible, with
point-to-multipoint point wireless transceiver links to other houses.
Each household that chose to have a computer and internet connection
made that decision with the full knowledge that they would be actively
participating in the study.

We set up the accounts using the Commonwealth government’s now obsolete
Australian Broadband Guarantee (ABG) scheme, which provided subsidized
internet to households in remote areas (see Chapter 1). CAT acted as
facilitator for the households (or, more precisely, the individuals
representing them), whose actual names would be on the application and
account for the service.

Although the ABG scheme subsidized provision of satellite broadband to
remote areas, connecting computers to these services was not
straightforward, but involved a long sequence of steps. Customers had to
determine via an online map which registered ISPs operated in their area
(or call the government department if internet access was not possible –
a likely scenario); register their details online; confirm their
permanent residency and the permanency of the building itself; contact
one or more of the ISPs to obtain and compare service offerings; and
forward the signed declaration form and their contract application to
apply for the service. For customers in very remote areas, the ISP would
then typically apply to the government department for approval for an
additional subsidy. Assuming the customer had arranged for a continuous
240-volt power supply, installation could then commence (notwithstanding
what could be several changes to the installation schedule due to
weather conditions affecting roads). Once the service was installed,
normal billing processes would ensue.

This series of actions is reasonably straightforward if the customer is
readily contactable by phone, has a good grasp of English and has
sufficient knowledge about broadband services to be able to make an
informed choice of service plan. However, the process can be
particularly trying for remote community residents who do not meet all
these criteria, and whose only external communications option is a
single payphone. Organizing the connections from the relative
convenience and comfort of CAT’s Alice Springs office took co-author
Andrew thirty phone calls. CAT was also quoted \$1,100 to have an
additional power point installed in a shed already serviced with power.
It was little wonder that no households had organized satellite internet
services.

The computer equipment supplier visited the communities with CAT to get
an idea of their layout and the dimensions and conditions of the
buildings, in order to design arrangements for the WiFi directional
antenna equipment. A separate company from Mt Isa, a sub-contractor to
the ISP, installed the internet satellite facilities the following month
with CAT’s assistance. Each installation only took several hours; the
sub-contractor’s visits to Mungalawarru and Imangara formed only one
stop on their three-week timetable, covering about 10,000km and
traversing western Queensland, northern South Australia and central and
southern Northern Territory. We decided that point-to-multipoint
wireless was a more cost-effective choice for connecting the computers
to the satellite internet services, because installing cable would also
have involved digging trenches between all the houses. Additionally, if
a house was rebuilt or added (and housing works did occur at Imangara in
the last year of the project), more cabling and trenches would be
needed.

In choosing an ISP, we took into account the suitability of the
available plans, especially the need for one with a high-speed quota,
because there would be several computers sharing the service. The
service we chose was also ‘shaped’ to ensure that once the monthly quota
was used up, there would be slow-speed residual access to the internet,
but no additional charges would accrue.[^105] By shaping the services,
we avoided a situation where one or more computers might monopolize the
internet quota by spreading the overall usage over the full billing
month period, preventing the quota being used up prematurely. However,
the low download capacity and speeds undoubtedly influenced the use of
the computers.

We began the installation process at Kwale Kwale, because it was closest
to Alice Springs (where CAT, the partner most involved in this stage,
was located), and therefore easier to roadtest the process and any
issues that might arise. We chose the large shed near the community’s
central core of three houses for the satellite dish and service, because
it had mains power, allowed direct connection to two of the four new
computers, and had a better (though not ideal) line of sight profile to
the other two houses for local WiFi radio connection. Locating the dish
in the shed later proved to be a problem, as it required that the
community maintain a power supply to the equipment by replenishing
pre-paid power cards as needed. Although households were prepared to do
this when the dish was co-located with other household appliances, the
same commitment did not stretch to a shared space, and the connection
would fail due to lack of power.

At Imangara, we had two satellite services installed, so that the level
of internet capacity at this larger community would be similar to that
available at the two smaller outstations. Originally, two senior
residents agreed to be the custodians for these services, so the dishes
were to be placed on their respective houses. However, one decided to
move to Tennant Creek to support his grandchildren, who were attending
school there, and the service intended for his house was moved instead
to the Women’s Centre, the other most viable option. This change of
arrangements took some time to confirm with the ABG staff, and was only
approved a short time before the installers visited the community. The
degree of mobility amongst remote-community people and the amount of
time this change took to process with the ABG group was early evidence
of the difficulties associated with subsidized satellite internet
programs in remote communities. Movement between houses, and to and from
community, was to become a significant factor that influenced people’s
access to the internet. As recounted in Part III, issues with providers
persisted when the households moved to the NBN interim satellite service
scheme in 2013.

### Computer Choices

The second level of infrastructure concerns involved whether the
households might want laptops or desktops, a decision that we believed
might be important in terms of residents’ mobility. On an early visit to
Imangara, we found a discarded laptop on the back of a trailer, which
was missing a keyboard. After observing this, we pointed out to the
residents that desktop computers were tougher, the screens and keyboards
were larger and easier to use, that desktop computers were also more
likely to stay in one place, and that the individual parts (keyboard,
monitor, mouse) could be replaced. Laptops, we said, were a good idea if
they expected to be moving to and from their community on a regular
basis. After weighing up the information we gave them, most community
members chose desktop computers rather than laptops. Along with
computers, we supplied printers, inks and paper, and accessories such as
mice, cables, headsets, speakers, keyboards, power boards and spare
monitors. People wanted to be able to print pictures and photos in color
from the computers, so we provided gel-based, inkjet color printers,
because they were cheaper at an entry level and at cost of printing per
sheet, and the ink was less likely than conventional inkjet printers to
dry out in extreme desert temperatures .

As we were interested in whether communal facilities were preferable to
home computers, we gave the communities the option to have some or all
of the computers in public spaces. Initially, people at the communities
weren’t sure whether they wanted individual computers in their houses,
or whether to share terminals. At Imangara, some senior women felt the
equipment would be safer in the only community building available, the
Women’s Centre. But by our next trip, most households preferred to have
their own computer. We put two more computers in the Women’s Centre, in
any case, for any residents who didn’t have computers in their homes,
and for use by the couple running the Women’s Centre. The use of these
computers is discussed further in the next chapter in relation to
ownership and sharing.

At Mungalawarru, residents came up with a mix of computers in four
houses, and two in what was known as the ‘CDEP Shed’—a building used for
the government’s Aboriginal work-for-the-dole scheme. People at
Mungalawarru were highly mobile, often shifting between their community,
Tennant Creek and other locations, and placing a couple of terminals in
a shed seemed like a good option, because more transitory community
members could use them. Two residents at Kwale Kwale chose to have a
home computer**,** but a senior couple was unsure about whether they
wanted one at home. Ultimately, the senior woman decided that the shed
was the best place, and we placed two of the four computers there for
them and their family members to use.

In total, we initially installed twenty computers: four at Kwale Kwale,
five at Mungalawurru and eleven at Imangara. Although only a few
computers ended up in public spaces such as sheds, as discussed in the
next chapter, tensions emerged around who got to use the communal
computers, who owned them or whether they were up for grabs. The
movement of the computers, and people’s claims over them, revealed to us
dynamics of Western and traditional notions of ownership that were
sometimes at odds (see Chapter 3 and Appendix 2).

The residents were concerned about protecting the equipment when they
were away from the house, or when they didn’t want kids using it.
Residents at Kwale Kwale first raised the idea of having lockable
computer and printer covers. CAT designed a computer cover with vents
around the top to allow heat generated by the equipment to disperse, as
well as a hasp that could be secured with a padlock. The Kwale Kwale
residents approved the cover, and it became the model for use in the
three communities. Tables with a robust metal frame were also provided
with each computer, and some of the residents and kids at a couple of
the communities helped paint the tables and covers.

When we first discussed with the residents the option of having a
computer, some told us they had no room for one. Some residents asked us
to build an extra room on their house for the computer, a suggestion we
politely refused. However, the issue of space did not turn out to be a
major problem for most households. We found the rooms in the larger
houses were sparse, possibly reflecting the fact that occupancy varied
often, and that individuals did not necessarily lay claim to particular
bedrooms.[^106] In most cases, the residents opted to place the computer
table in the most spacious room – the main living room at the front of
the house. A handful of residents decided to put the computer table in a
bedroom.

We documented movements of computers between houses in order to
understand the implications for home internet. If satellite internet was
organized at the household level, with a dish attached to the roof of
the dwelling, moving houses would have implications for individuals
accessing that internet connection. We developed the hypothesis that
community-wide broadband infrastructure – such as a shared WiFi network
that could be received at any dwelling – would be necessary, due to such
intra-community relocation. As mentioned, by the end of the project, a
number of households had chosen individual subscriptions over such an
arrangement, with those households having at least some family members
who could be considered permanent occupants.

### Detractors and the Fate of the Infrastructure

When the project commenced, detractors said that the computers would
never last given the harsh environment, distance from repair outlets,
overcrowded spaces, and even dogs. Cultural factors to do with communal
sharing, mobility and ownership were also raised as likely obstacles to
home computing, meaning the computers would be given away or taken out
of the homes permanently. A station owner told us it was a ‘hare-brained
idea’ that would give community members another reason ‘to sit at home
and do nothing’. Essentially, the fact that very few households had
purchased computers and entered into internet subscriptions of their own
accord was seen as proof that home internet was, at best, not the
preferred means of access, and at worst, either inappropriate or
unviable.

The detractors were wrong, in that despite equipment failure, loss or
damage, an average of seventeen of the twenty computers installed by
early August 2011 were still operational by the end of the first year.
By the end of the project (twenty-five months since installation), two
computers had been lost or taken out of the community. For comparison, a
study of computers in offices conducted by an American commercial
research company revealed that three and a half computers would
typically fail in a twenty-five-month period (see Table 3 in Appendix 2
and Crouch 2014 for a full account).[^107]

Computer accessories, such as headsets, mice, keyboards, cover padlocks
and power boards did not fare as well, being comparatively vulnerable to
damage and removal. After the first few months of the project, computer
tables were rarely locked and items often disappeared, especially power
boards and external speakers, which could be used with other household
equipment. Not surprisingly, printers were the equipment to break down
most frequently, in some cases irreparably so, with an estimated service
lifetime of about two years in these communities. The build-up of dust
and grit inside printers, often caused by residents leaving the cover
off the paper feed, was a particular source of malfunction. We took one
broken printer back to Alice Springs to determine whether it could be
rescued, only to find a perfectly formed mouse nest made of shredded
paper nestled inside. By contrast, the network equipment (satellite
dish, modem, network switch, local area wireless transceiver equipment,
roof-mounted antenna and cabling) did not experience any hardware
failures; any network failures related to issues with the injector or
cabling within households.

Community members asked for technical support for a variety of matters,
such as equipment failures, corrupted applications, and password issues.
In one email, Andrew was told that one of the printers ‘needs pink, red,
blue, green, yellow, orange cartridges’. Only a few instances involved
problems that prevented the resident from using the computer entirely.
Sometimes another computer was available that they could use until
repairs took place. Printer problems were relatively frequent,
particularly later in the project, although some of these, such as paper
feed pick-up issues, usually required working surfaces to be cleaned
rather than needing tools, spare parts or software skills to be
resolved. Residents often did not attempt to fix these minor mechanical
issues themselves, possibly because they knew they could wait for the
next support visit to resolve the problem.

We concluded that the difficulties with organizing installation were a
far greater barrier to home internet than the maintenance and
replacement of equipment. Although replacements and repairs were needed,
the frequency of these events did not necessarily warrant a supervised
or publicly-maintained model of ICT access (such as a shared computer
room). We now turn to what happened once the computers arrived, and how
particular events impacted on computer use and ownership, including
travel, moving house and death. We also discuss who used the computers
the most, and what they were used for.

<span id="_Toc318452851" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811696" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811495" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc318452850" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span>PART II
===================================================================================================================================================================================================

<span id="_Toc318452851" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811696" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811495" class="anchor"></span></span></span>Chapter 3: Ownership and Values
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In 2002, a report commissioned to inform a plan for telecommunications
in remote communities stated that ‘the best solution to provide Internet
and higher bandwidth services, such as videoconferencing, will be via
**public online access centers**. Public access is more affordable and
is well suited to the generally-communal lifestyle of these remote
communities. It also provides a central point for community support and
training’ (emphasis in original).[^108] The notion that Aboriginal
culture requires shared facilities was carried through in a number of
subsequent studies. Anne Daly, at the Centre for Aboriginal Economic
Policy Research, examined 2001 census data, in which she found that
while in 2001 30 per cent of the Non-Indigenous population had home
internet access, only 10 per cent of the Indigenous population did. This
supported the Telecommunications Action Plan for Remote and Indigenous
Communities (TAPRIC) findings that computer centers could help overcome
the digital divide.[^109]

A study of information and communications technology (ICT) centers by
McCallum and Papandrea found that ‘home use is neither an attainable,
nor necessarily desirable, outcome for most remote Indigenous
communities. In the remote Indigenous communities that this study
visited, the internet was considered to be a community rather than an
individual facility, to be managed and used by the whole
community’.[^110] In its marketing plan setting out the equipment, goods
or services that Telstra will supply in fulfilment of the Universal
Service Obligation (USO) throughout Australia, Telstra stated that ‘the
notion of “shared resources” plays a stronger role in many remote
Indigenous communities than in other areas.[^111] This means that the
provision of “shared phones” such as payphones can be a more appropriate
solution’.

We found no evidence that the ‘generally communal lifestyle’ of
remote-living Aboriginal people negates home internet. In this chapter,
we discuss how traditional and Western systems of ownership played out
during the home internet trial, and draw on anthropological literature
to contend that different values are placed on different kinds of
objects. Computer ownership was more likely to occur at the household
level, while difficulties arose in relation to shared computers (see
Chapter 9 for a case study of a shared computer facility in Papunya).
The related issue of how training is best provided is examined in detail
in Chapter 6.

The system of demand sharing, a mechanism for the distribution of goods
and services, plays an important role in maintaining socio-economic
relationships amongst remote Aboriginal people. This form of exchange is
said to have foundations in traditional lifestyle, when sharing was a
matter of survival in a situation of scarcity and unpredictable food
supply. Today, demand sharing fulfils social obligations, and acts as a
levelling mechanism, whereby those with more resources give, when asked,
to those with less. The considered way in which this occurs can be
described as a ‘calculus of reciprocity’.[^112] Anthropologist L.R.
Hiatt writes: ‘Probably everywhere in Aboriginal Australia the highest
secular value is generosity. Readiness to share with others is the main
measure of a man's goodness, and hospitality an essential source of his
self-esteem’.[^113]

Such a worldview may result in ICTs being valued differently from the
mainstream, which in turn may influence adoption and usage. Nicholls’
research, for example, found that the Yolngu town of Ramingining
‘definitely’ did not ‘revolve around a computer on a desk’, but more
recent observations in Ngaanyatjarra communities suggest that personal
computers are becoming increasingly important in remote communities,
second only to cars, as the most valued commodity.[^114]

Understanding the relative importance placed on the maintenance of
social relationships and concern for others, in contrast to that placed
on objects as objects *per se*, is the key to understanding how demand
sharing functions. In attempting to establish a critical mass of
household computer users in the three communities, we sought to
understand what implications the demand sharing system might have for
ICT provision in remote Aboriginal Australia. We were aware, for
example, that the computers would be subject to types of ownership
within the demand sharing system that would be more influential than the
Western form of legal ownership we invited participants to take up. We
hoped to gain some insights into the interplay between both systems of
ownership, and what lessons these might have for ICT policy development
and provision in remote Aboriginal contexts.

Previous ethnographic research has documented different types of
ownership and associated rights and obligations in relation to different
objects, including public and private forms, which operate within demand
sharing processes in Aboriginal society. The literature makes a
significant distinction between ownership and usage: while an item might
be ‘owned’ by an individual, this does not necessarily equate to
exclusive or any usage by that same individual. However, the onus is on
a person to ask for use of an object, and giving in response to a
legitimate demand fulfils a social obligation. Not only does the
practice of demand sharing redistribute resources, but various social
alliances and networks are created and maintained in the process, while
the autonomy of the giver is acknowledged. In this way, demand sharing
is integral to the tension between relatedness and individual autonomy
that underpins all Aboriginal social practices.[^115]

### Aboriginal Ownership and Demand Sharing: Relatedness and Autonomy

In recent times, a popular mainstream view has emerged that all demand
sharing equates to ‘humbugging’: begging relatives to give or share
resources.[^116] This view provides a limited and erroneous
understanding of the true nature and role that demand sharing plays in
maintaining Aboriginal socio-economic systems. Drawing on his work
amongst the Pintupi people in the Western desert region, anthropologist
Fred Myers describes demand sharing as a form of equivalent exchange:

Those who live together must, according to Pintupi notions, ‘help each
other’. This means that, upon demand at least, co-residents should be
willing to give food, clothing, and other material items or, as the case
may be now, provide transportation or labor. In Pintupi understanding,
the distribution of valued objects and services reflects and creates
relatedness. Thus, they insist, those who live – or have regularly lived
– together are *walytja*[^117], what we can translate as ‘relatives’ or
‘kin’. They must help each other, and such help, once given, should be
reciprocated.[^118]

Myers also notes that a wide range of relationships were conceptualized
by Pintupi in terms of their own concept or metaphor of *kanyininpa*, a
word used to designate the ‘having’ (as in possession) or ‘holding’ of
an object.[^119] Similarly, the term *walytja* refers to a sense of
belonging or shared identity, and could be used in relation to
possessions, kin, ‘one’s own (my own) and oneself, as well as to refer
to a wider sense of belonging.[^120] Here the notion of ownership
translates into ‘identification’, and provides a sense that rights to
objects are (and should be) more widely distributed to include others as
co-owners.[^121]

At the broader level, Myers’ work highlights a general attitude towards
personal possessions amongst the Pintupi: ‘property’, regardless of what
it cost, was considered replaceable, and if faced with a choice of
caring for property or caring for people, they preferred to invest in
the latter.[^122] Indeed, the Pintupi saw non-Aboriginal people as more
concerned with the accumulation of individual wealth, money and objects
than with their relationships to kin, family and friends.[^123] Amongst
the Pintupi, relationships with relatives were more highly valued than
ordinary possessions.[^124] For them, ownership of objects provided a
mechanism by which social relationships were maintained; the object
itself was of less importance than the opportunity to ‘give’ or
participate in the relationship.

Gaynor Macdonald’s research amongst the Wiradjuri in New South Wales
found that demand sharing did not indicate a system of communal property
or an absence of personal ownership. Rather, obligations existed because
highly-differentiated notions of personal ownership were recognized, and
because it was how an individual shared what she or he had rights over
that defined that person.[^125] The autonomy of the individual was
maintained in this way within social networks. Many researchers have
noted the tension that exists between relatedness and autonomy, and that
strategies exist that one may employ to look after one’s own interests
so items are not parted with indiscriminately. Tonkinson, for example,
observed that some individuals carried two tobacco tins, one of which
was always kept empty as proof that they had no tobacco to give when
asked.[^126] Myers also made similar observations during his research
with the Pintupi. He noted that people sometimes hid possessions in
order to avoid having to relinquish anything when asked; thus one could
express compassion without physically giving.[^127] However, it was
important to maintain a fairly balanced account in one’s transactions
with others.[^128] Sansom recorded that people would sometimes declare
items to be ‘private’: that is, off-limits to normal demands from
kin.[^129]

### Ownership and the Role of Passwords and Padlocks

At the start of the project, the few individuals who had laptops told us
that they would hide them from others to keep them safe. When the
desktop computers arrived, some community members managed the dynamic
between autonomy and relatedness through their use of padlocks and
passwords to regulate others’ access to the household computers.
Virtually all residents with desktop computers said that visitors to
their community had used their computers at one time or another, often
without permission while they were away. Often this involved people
cutting off the padlocks on the computer covers or prising off the hasp.
Some found this highly annoying, and took steps to limit access to their
computer when they were out of the community, either through
passwording, and/or by locking the desk cover, and/or by having an
individual room or house where the computer was kept. One woman took the
computer cords with her when she travelled. Mostly houses were not
locked, even when people went away.

Once some participants had obtained individual internet accounts and
were paying for the internet themselves, we gained the impression that
asking permission to use the computers became more common, and that
usage became more restricted to the individual household/family (almost
two-thirds at this point told us that people had asked to use their
computers). One woman at Imangara said she only allowed
non-household/family members to use her computer in exceptional
circumstances: for example, when people needed to contact relatives
about arranging funerals, and had run out of money for a phone card, she
would allow them to contact relatives via Facebook on her computer. A
woman from Mungalawurru told us that some residents from other
households had asked her if she could leave the computer cabinet open
while she was in Tennant Creek so they could use it, but that she’d
started closing the cabinet because ‘they were using it too much’, and
we observed that it was closed and padlocked. There seemed to be greater
awareness that the owner was paying for internet access, and this
impacted on the social dynamics and decision-making surrounding requests
and permission to use the computers.

Likewise, the use of passwords became a way of managing others’ –
especially visitors’, and to a lesser extent, kids’ – access to the
computers. Initially, few residents set passwords on their computers,
probably because of the inconvenience of having to remember and enter a
password, coupled with a limited understanding of computer and internet
safety and security generally. But, as the project progressed, more
people began asking us for assistance to set a password, usually in the
context of managing others’ usage, as well as preventing unauthorized
access when they were away from the community. One woman, for example,
requested we set a password on her computer to ‘stop visitors using it
and using up all the power’, while another asked for a password for her
computer so she could ‘stop people using it’ while she had visitors
staying in her house; she started changing the password when too many
people had access. A resident reported that someone had cut the padlock
off her computer. and consequently she wanted a new and better password.
By the end of April 2014, passwords had been established on 65 per cent
of computers.

However, others felt that setting passwords for managing kids’ usage in
particular was not a straightforward solution. One man, who did not have
an internet connection at the time, said he’d been thinking of putting a
password on the computer, but had decided against it to avoid being
humbugged by his grandkids to use the PC, although he also thought that
having a password might ‘steady them down from using \[it too much\]’.
He added that he would put a password on the computer if he got an
internet service.

Rather than being an expression of ownership and attachment, it seems
that the setting of passwords on computers by participants during the
project was primarily a means of managing others’ usage. In this way,
individual participants could negotiate their autonomy and relatedness:
autonomy through establishing (or changing) a password, and relatedness
through sharing that password with select individuals but not others.

### Aboriginal Ownership of ‘Things’

Existing ethnographic literature explores the different types of
ownership that operate within Aboriginal society, demonstrating that
these concepts extend beyond simple Western legal notions. Aboriginal
ownership of land is conceptualized according to connections to totemic
ancestors who created the landscape, kin relations to these ancestors,
and among owners, and such relationships are framed in terms of
inalienable connections to places, rights and obligations.[^130] By
contrast, the ownership of consumable and moveable items – such as
computers and television sets – is subject to demand sharing, and is not
thought of as an inalienable right, although personal ownership of
equipment is recognized. As well as the purpose for which they were
designed or manufactured, objects may play a role within the processes
through which social relationships are structured, mediated, tested and
re-shaped. Often it is how an object can be used, rather than what it
is, that influences and determines the nature of various social
interactions and outcomes. Accordingly, some objects may be subject to
different kinds of ownership in the course of their use-lives.

Nuances of different kinds of Aboriginal ownership became evident in the
ways that certain individuals tested others’ ownership of some computers
in the project communities. The computers became objects through which
relationships were negotiated within the system of demand sharing in
each community. These relationships were not necessarily limited to
those within the individual household. They also affected the dynamics
surrounding computers within shared spaces, such as the Women’s Centre
at Imangara and the Community Development Employment Projects (CDEP)
Shed at Mungalawarru. Although most of the computers were installed
within individual households, the dynamics surrounding the computers in
shared spaces were illuminating, suggesting different forms of
Aboriginal ownership at work in these communities, with implications for
how to provide equitable access to ICT access.

When we installed computers at Imangara, we placed two in the Women’s
Centre, mainly for use by residents who did not have a desktop computer
in their own households, but also for the couple supervising the Centre.
In time it became apparent that the couple considered the computers to
be ‘theirs’, restricting access mainly to themselves and some of their
family members. They even put a password on their user account on one of
the PCs.

In this instance, the couple appeared to be enacting a form of
Aboriginal ownership perhaps closest to Western notions: that is,
ownership confers exclusive rights to possess and/or use a particular
item. The owner also has the prerogative to determine who else may use
that item, and under what circumstances. A distinction is invoked
between private and public ownership: that is, the object is ‘private’
or off-limits to others, including the right to ask, or ‘public’ –
others have a right to ask to use that particular object. Although this
example relates to contemporary Western material culture,
anthropologists have also documented personal ownership of non-Western
or traditional objects such as the *wanari* (short stout digging sticks)
used by Pintupi women, which suggests that personal ownership is not
necessarily a post-contact phenomenon.[^131]

Other residents expressed their irritation about this situation to us,
initially in veiled, oblique terms, then more openly. In one instance, a
senior woman, whose household did not receive a computer, approached us
eight months later, asking if she could get a computer at her house: not
for herself, but for ‘her grandchildren’. At the time, we didn’t have
enough funding to buy more desktop computers, so we suggested that her
grandchildren use the computers at the Women’s Centre. She responded
that it ‘was too far \[away\] to walk \[to\]’, which seemed rather
unlikely, given that her house was only 200 metres from the Centre.
Instead, it seemed that limited access to the computers in the Women’s
Centre was the real reason.

This couple also dominated usage of other facilities at the Women’s
Centre, such as the telephone, a practice observed by the Regional
Council workers, as well as the local school principal. The disquiet
their monopolization of these items caused amongst other community
members reflects findings within the anthropological literature that
although items non-Aboriginal people own or control within a community
are not usually subject to the same level of demand sharing, they may
nevertheless still be used to test social relationships.[^132] This
observation is particularly relevant here, given that Western legal
ownership of the computers initially remained with an organization – the
Centre for Appropriate Technology (CAT) – prior to being transferred to
individual participants. Similarly, Fogarty found, while based at
Maningrida, that the school vehicle (a 4WD troop carrier) was not
usually the focus of the sort of conflict embedded in ownership of
private or community vehicle use, because it was seen as being owned by
‘government’, an entity not part of the local social organization. This
did not mean there weren’t any conflicts about the school 4WD, or that
local Aboriginal people did not exert some form of claim over the
vehicle, but the conflict related to usage constraints, such as the
number of passengers, rather than ownership.[^133]

Interestingly, the mother of the woman who worked at the Women’s Centre,
who was also one of the senior woman’s daughters, sometimes used the
computer in the Centre, although she had her own computer and internet
connection at home. It seems that her close kin association with her
daughter facilitated her use of the Centre’s computers. Although most of
the computers were installed within individual households, the
circumstances surrounding the usage of the computers at the Women’s
Centre – ostensibly a communal space – was indicative of a trend we
noticed across the project communities: that residents did not share the
computers as much as we had expected, especially beyond family groups.

When we commenced the trial, we developed a system whereby the residents
would sign an agreement that transferred ownership of the computers from
us to them. The agreement was developed partly for legal reasons, and
partly as a means to reinforce to the residents that they could manage
the computers however they wished if they chose to take possession of
them. Interestingly, despite their possessiveness, neither the couple
nor anyone else signed ownership agreements for the two computers while
they were at the Centre (which also appeared to be linked to the
couple’s moderate degree of mobility, as we’ll discuss further in
Chapter 4). Later, when the couple had left the community, another
couple signed a formal ownership agreement for a Women’s Centre computer
at Imangara within three months of it being relocated from the Centre
into their house. This appears to support the understanding that an
individual(s) who has non-exclusive usage rights to an item does not
gain any additional powers, rights or personal standing, even if he or
she is the person(s) primarily associated with it. Musharbash, for
example, observed that specific bedrooms in a house were not ‘owned’ in
the exclusive Western sense; rather, each room would be primarily
associated with a particular person, who would nevertheless share access
and use of it with others, usually those of the *jilimi* (women’s camp)
or close relatives.[^134] When that individual moved to another camp,
the room then became associated with someone else. An association with a
particular room did not confer any additional rights or power over other
spaces in the house or *jilimi*; nor did it add any personal standing to
that individual.[^135] In the same way, although the couple was
primarily associated with the computer and other facilities in the
Women’s Centre, they did not have any exclusive rights to them once they
had left the community.

Initially, we installed two PCs in the CDEP shed at Mungalawarru for
residents’ general use, but soon afterwards, one of these was relocated
within the community. A woman signed a formal ownership agreement for
the one that remained in the shed, and although it was still available
for use by other residents, they consistently referred to it as the
woman’s computer. While her ownership of this computer appeared to
approximate Western notions, the events that ensued when the woman left
the community suggest that although her individual ownership was
recognized, it did not confer exclusive use.

Several weeks after the woman relocated more or less permanently to
Tennant Creek, a couple moved the computer into their house, placing
their own computer on a table to one side because it had technical
problems. A month later, prior to visiting Mungalawarru, we ran into the
woman in Tennant Creek, and she made a point of telling us that she
wanted ‘her’ computer back.

Several interpretations of these events are possible. Other residents
may have considered this computer to be communal or shared property,
available for use when required, given its public location in the CDEP
shed, despite the fact that the woman owned it in a Western legal sense,
and was primarily associated with it. While the woman’s individual
ownership of the computer was recognized (i.e. in how it was named),
this did not confer exclusive rights of usage on her: only the right to
determine who could use the computer, for as long as she was perceived
to be a permanent resident at Mungalawarru. Once she had moved to
Tennant Creek, others may have felt that she had relinquished her
ownership of the computer and abandoned it, and that it was now
available for others to take up.

In his work amongst Darwin’s town campers, anthropologist Basil Sansom
(1980) observed a distinction between private and public ownership of
items, including cash. Specifically, he used the term ‘routine’
ownership to refer to things, persons and words that were potentially
available to other individuals through the mechanism of demand sharing.
In contrast, when something was declared ‘private’, it was removed from
the realm of social relationships and associated obligations, and was
essentially ‘off limits’ to others. However, ownership of such items may
move back and forth between the private and public domains over a period
of time, according to the location (whether it is a private or public
space) and other circumstances.[^136]

The fact that the computer was in a public space may have signalled the
potential for a change in ownership once the woman had left the
community. The anthropological literature also distinguishes between the
dynamics surrounding ownership of ‘high end’ items, such as vehicles, as
well as scarce or ‘luxury’ goods, with those considered for ‘everyday’
use. Myers observed that Pintupi people distinguished between private
and community property in relation to vehicle ownership.[^137] ‘Private’
vehicles were those purchased with an individual’s own money, with the
result that he or she was recognized as the proprietor of that vehicle
with the right to make decisions regarding its use. In contrast,
‘community’ or company vehicles, usually purchased through government or
foundation grants, were often the subject of conflict arising from the
problem of who could be said to ‘own’ something that was owned by ‘the
community*’.*

The couple’s decision to move the computer into their house may have
been based on a pragmatic rationale that the computers had been
‘abandoned’ and were available for re-use: that since the woman was
absent from Mungalawarru, she wouldn’t need the computer and that it was
more convenient to move the computer into their house rather than
waiting for theirs to be fixed, or using it in the CDEP Shed.
O’Connell’s observations about Alyawarr ownership of physical objects,
such as everyday items found in houses, suggests that in addition to an
item’s function, its cost and/or relative availability may be a factor
in determining whether or not ownership remains with the individual
purchaser, or whether the item becomes part of the assemblage owned by
the household.[^138] Amongst the Alyawarr, ownership and control of
structural materials was usually vested in the household unit as long as
the materials were being used.[^139] Once community members perceived
such items to be abandoned, they were available for reclamation by
anyone. Items that were costly but relatively portable, such as tents,
tended to remain the property of an individual or a household for as
long as they were useful, unless they were specifically sold, traded or
given away.

These stories about desktop computers in shared spaces at Imangara and
Mungalawarru highlight the strength of Aboriginal forms of ownership in
remote communities. They also strongly suggest that the location of
individual computers influences notions of, and the strength of, this
ownership: i.e. that people with a desktop computer in their own house
had a stronger claim/right to ownership of that computer (and by
extension, demonstrate a particular type of ownership). By contrast,
people who were notionally responsible for computers located in public
spaces appeared to have weaker claims to some form of ‘ownership’,
and/or demonstrated a different type of ownership, even though they were
strongly associated with use and access to these computers. Ownership of
computers in individual houses appeared to possess an exclusivity
similar to Western legal notions, compared to computers in public spaces
where ownership constituted a primary or shared/collective association.

Contrary to our original expectations that Aboriginal social structures
and practices might automatically foster greater sharing of ICT
resources and skills amongst participants, with positive implications
for diminishing the digital divide, the sharing of resources was
concentrated on kinship networks between families and across households,
and amongst individual families within houses. Even when computers were
situated in public spaces, and not formally owned by a particular
individual(s), this did not necessarily result in equitable access to
ICT devices and the internet. In Chapter 9 we discuss how this has
proven difficult in relation to shared internet facilities in a larger
community.

Another factor that came into play here was the implications that
relationships between families and households had, not only for
individuals’ access to computers and the internet, but also for
installation of ICT equipment and networks. These became more apparent
through the affiliations along household and family lines that emerged
towards the project’s end, when we began discussing with community
members whether their household wanted to pay for an internet plan or to
share a connection with others. The following story highlights how these
family affiliations, as well as the influence of elders on
decision-making, shaped the distribution of ICT resources.

### Family Distinctions and the Influence of Elders on ICT Arrangements

While discussing with us potential options for sharing internet
connections after the project, one of the senior women at Imangara said
she wanted her own ‘dish’, and that she only wanted to pay for her
household’s usage. We asked if she would consider sharing a connection
with the house next door, which was occupied by her daughter, her
children and grandchildren. Her sister (by kinship), Mary, then
interjected, pointing out that the arrangement might work, referring to
her sister’s house as ‘you mob’ and her niece’s house as ‘that mob’.

Mary was the senior person most often involved in liaising with us, and
in working out ICT arrangements in the community. She had significant
responsibilities representing the community in external organizations,
and was thus a key liaison for various visitors (including a linguist
working in the community at the time). Mary, as we will see, was one of
the few residents who came to rely on email for correspondence with
outside agencies, although she did so with assistance from others. On
this occasion, Mary pointed at a map of Imangara showing the location of
the two existing satellite dishes and all the houses connected to the
internet, indicating that she would share a dish with her mob. This
included not only her immediate household, but her grandson and
granddaughter-in-law in the house next door, another grandson and
granddaughter-in-law in a house a bit further away, and another
granddaughter and grandson-in-law, whose house was still further away,
with other households in between.

But on one of our previous visits, Mary’s granddaughter-in-law, Emily,
had strongly asserted that everyone should have their own internet
connection, and only pay for what each individual household used. Emily,
who worked at the school and had a young family, had become one of the
more confident users in the community. Emily was also quite financially
literate, and likely to understand the difficulties that a shared
arrangement would involve in terms of payment. Basically, payment for an
internet plan can only be made from one individual’s account, which
means that he or she would then have to extract a share of that payment
from all the others who shared that connection. This would place an
extra burden and responsibility on that individual.

Mary seemed willing to take on this responsibility for her ‘mob’ when we
next visited, even though she had been at pains to point out to us
during an earlier trip that the extra electricity required to run the
satellite dish on her roof, which provides connectivity for her own
house plus three others, was too much for her and her partner to pay.
Although Emily had previously expressed the view that everyone should
have their own dish, she deferred to Mary on this occasion, appearing to
accept her decision regarding a new arrangement in which only her
household would share with Mary’s. Notably, by this time, Mary’s two
grandsons and their partners were not to share with Mary, but to have
their own internet connections. It seemed that Mary had not pressed them
to review this decision, perhaps because it was her grandsons rather
than her granddaughters who were involved, although it was two of her
grand-daughters-in-law, including Emily, who told us about this
decision.

Emily may also have agreed to share with Mary out of a concern for
Mary’s ability to pay for the internet connection on her own. The other
reason for Emily’s change of mind might have been that her personal
situation had altered between our two visits: her household income had
halved after her partner lost his job. However, Emily later chose to
have her own internet connection, while Mary and another granddaughter,
who was looking after the house next door while its residents were
interstate, decided they would share Mary’s connection. It seems that
Emily had wanted to have her own connection all along.

These developments were in keeping with the trend that emerged during
the project on sharing ICT resources amongst kinship networks between
families across households and amongst individual families within
houses. Both Western legal ownership and Aboriginal ownership of the
majority of the computers appears to have been vested in particular
individuals, rather than to have taken the form of collective ownership
by households or families. Eventually, all participants who decided to
retain internet access chose to establish an individual household
connection and account, with one exception (see Chapter 9). Another
factor in the trend towards individual ownership was probably residents’
increasing awareness that a computer’s formal owner would have to bear
the brunt of power and internet bill costs.

### Valuing Hardware and the Internet

During the project, we were interested in seeing whether participants
would value computers differently from mainstream users, and how this
might influence adoption and usage. Attitudes towards property in
Aboriginal society operate on two levels: as a broad ‘world view’
perspective, and on a more personal level that allows for changes in
individual attitudes according to various circumstances. As an example
of the latter, Taylor observed a change in attitudes towards material
possessions, from relatively frugal and generally confined to simple
items (i.e. clothing, bedding, tools, weapons, utensils) to a desire for
new furniture, furnishings and household appliances once people occupied
permanent dwellings.[^140]

According to the anthropological literature, objects may be valued for
various reasons, not all necessarily related solely to usage. Tanner
suggests that ‘defining modes of value for digital culture that are not
solely economically driven but which do contain indicators of value that
can be measured and can demonstrate change’, are important when
considering the impact of digital resources.[^141] He identifies four
values in addition to utility: existence and/or prestige, education,
community (being part of a community that is afforded by the digital
resource) and inheritance/bequest value. Additionally, values are not
fixed, nor static. For example, Renfrew’s work highlights how the value
of certain objects may alter over time, reflecting new uses and forms of
political control. Davenport has observed that particular objects can
possess multiple values depending on circumstances, and that these
values are not limited to those held by the owner or end user, but may
be held collectively by a community.[^142] Myers notes that the value
possessed by objects is characterized by what he called ‘slippage’, in
which the relative value of the object (whether quantitative or
qualitative) declines.[^143] Regarding computers, Brown et al. suggest
that they change from being considered luxury items to being thought of
as necessities, which in turn may also influence adoption and
usage.[^144]

In the case of the three communities, we considered the nature and
extent to which participants valued the computers and internet access,
and whether any changes in how they valued the ICTs emerged across the
project. We took into account factors such as participants’ readiness to
maintain internet access, what they were prepared to pay, and how
community members personalized their computers, as indicators of what
value they placed on home computers and internet access. We also
attempted to assess the comparative value of the computers in relation
to other material objects used by participants, such as cars, mobile
phones, X-boxes, fridges and TVs, as well as the community payphone, as
a means of gauging their significance in remote community life.

By the end of September 2013, there were relatively high rates of formal
ownership (signed agreements) of the computers and payment for internet
plans at Imangara and Mungalawarru, suggesting that most participants
valued the PCs and internet access. In the initial phases of the
project, community members’ interest in having internet access grew
considerably. Between February and November 2012, when we asked
individuals regularly present in both these communities whether they’d
be prepared to pay for their own internet service, the proportion of
participants willing to pay increased from 40 to 77 per cent.
Eventually, two-thirds of participants actually retained internet
access; the remaining third did not because of mobility issues (i.e.
they had moved or were anticipating moving from the community), or
because they found the payment methods too difficult to manage. Given
that project funding supported payment for internet use until September
2013, these results suggest that participants attached real value to
maintaining connectivity at a tangible cost to themselves.

We also periodically asked participants how much they’d be prepared to
pay for internet access at the end of the project, as a gross measure of
how much they valued the ICTs in monetary terms. When we first asked
them in February 2012, only two individuals (a couple) out of fifteen
nominated an actual amount. By contrast, in November 2012, twelve out of
thirteen individuals nominated a sum of money, varying from \$20/month
up to \$200-300/month, with three people saying they’d be prepared to
pay at least \$100/month. However, by March 2013, the amounts they named
had moderated, coalescing around \$40-\$60/month, most likely as
residents became better informed of the various plans available.
Overall, it seems that a more pragmatic attitude emerged as the project
progressed and once funding support ended.

Psychologists Pierce and colleagues suggest that feelings of ownership
are created first by controlling an object through possession, then by
becoming familiar with it through actual or imagined use, and/or
investing the self into it (e.g. through identification).[^145] As an
indication of the potential value people placed on their desktop
computers, we examined how the residents personalized them, for example
by posting photographs, usually of family members, as wallpaper and/or
screensavers. When we visited the communities in 2014, almost half those
we interviewed said they had personalized their computer. Of two people
who stated that they hadn’t personalized their computers, we’d observed
that one of these had changed her computer’s wallpaper before. Three
said they couldn’t remember, although we’d previously noticed they had
personally configured or chosen their computers’ wallpaper, and one
individual had replaced the particular photograph she’d used earlier as
wallpaper on her computer.

Those who personalized the computers in this way were not necessarily
their formal owners, and we do not know whether they had asked the
owner’s permission in each instance. However, one example suggests that
such personalization by users was not always with the owner’s approval.
In September 2013, Mary asked one of the researchers to change the
wallpaper on her computer, from the rather violent gaming image, which
one of the younger male residents in her house had probably installed,
to feature a gospel image. Personalization also occurred on computers in
shared spaces: those managing the Women’s Centre put wallpaper featuring
sports cars on the computers, although this may have been part of their
attempt at possession of these computers.

At the end of the project, we asked people how important the computer
was to them, compared to other household items such as TVs, mobile
phones and refrigerators, commonly using the television as an item for
comparison. Most of those who responded to this question said that the
computer was more important than the TV, regardless of whether they were
adept users.

These perceptions of the computers’ comparative value did not appear to
reflect the phenomenon known as ‘source dependence’, either, whereby
people become attached to objects because of how they were obtained,
such as whether they’d paid for them or received them by chance.[^146]
Specifically, source dependence is where objects are more highly valued
when people believe that they have obtained them as a result of their
own efforts.[^147] According to this logic, we would expect most
community members to value TVs more highly than the computers, because
they’d bought the televisions themselves, but this was not always the
case. This preference for the computers may reflect individual personal
interests and awareness of the computers’ potential uses, the presence
of some sort of existence/status and community value, that the TVs were
considered to be more of an ‘everyday’ item, or a combination of all
these factors.

### Conclusion

In opening this chapter, we suggested that Aboriginal people living in
remote communities might value computers and the internet differently
from the mainstream, with implications for their adoption and usage. The
outstation residents clearly valued the computers and internet access,
although, as we will see in later chapters, their relative value – as
expressed in how they personalized the computers and valued them in
relation to other household items – changed over the project. As we will
see in later chapters, the amounts of money people were prepared to pay
for internet access also changed as participants became increasingly
aware of the real costs of retaining internet access, ownership and
maintenance of the computer, especially electricity bills. The relative
value of ICTs is also likely to fluctuate depending on an individual’s
life circumstances; for example, when money is short, basics such as
food, power and transport may take priority rather than fixing a
computer or paying for an internet plan.

Contrary to the idea that the ‘caring and sharing’ ethic (that
non-Indigenous people often associate with Aboriginal culture) might
result in more collective possession and use of the computers, ownership
of most of the computers in the project became invested in particular
individuals. Access, and by extension usage, was largely restricted to
the household/immediate family members, with the owner determining who
could use the computer. The use of passwords emerged as a key mechanism
in managing demands, particularly from visitors and kids, and as a way
of preventing unauthorized or excessive use of the computers when the
owners were absent.

Ownership is embedded within the system of demand sharing, in which
objects may function as a mechanism through which social relationships
are continually tested, mediated and re-negotiated. This understanding
has implications for the design of future ICT arrangements, including
payment method for internet access (discussed in Chapters 8 and 9)., In
particular, flexibility to allow for changes in ownership and
residential mobility needs to be incorporated into ICT provision to
these communities, a subject that will be taken up in the next chapter.

<span id="_Toc419811697" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811496" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc318452852" class="anchor"></span></span></span>Chapter 4: Mobility
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Six months after computers and internet access were installed at Kwale
Kwale, Rhonda, a middle-aged woman who had been using computers at work,
expressed concern to us that some of her older relatives drove forty
kilometres to Alice Springs almost every day to shop, estimating that
they spent about \$30 per trip on fuel. She was hoping to teach them and
other community members how to shop online for groceries and other
supplies to reduce their transport costs. Her older relatives had
already told us that they wished to avoid having to live in town to
access medical services, and seemed stressed at the prospect of being
away from country and family for any length of time. The same couple had
moved into a caravan when another daughter and her family moved in, due
to maintenance issues in their house. The family’s concerns are
indicative of three types of mobility typical of outstations: the costs
and inconveniences associated with living on an outstation, relocation
to towns to access services, and individuals moving from house to house
within a community, all of which we discuss in this chapter in relation
to ICT.

These seemingly ordinary concerns – relocation and travel – have a
social dimension, in that living at a distance from essential services
can contribute to hardship. The resulting fluctuating occupancy of
remote settlements, and the expense that their remoteness confers on
individuals and services, have been ever-present themes in the debate on
government resourcing of outstations. The Commonwealth’s decision to
direct resources to larger towns only (see Chapter 1), and its
divestment of funding to the states, has resulted in a significant and
(at the time of writing) ongoing social movement against the so-called
‘closure’ of remote communities. Underlying these developments has been
what some consider a new policy trend of ‘mainstreaming’, whereby those
living in outstations are expected to move to larger towns to reduce
public expense. As discussed in previous chapters, researchers have been
divided over the benefits of staying on country versus relocation, and
the cultural and wellbeing advantages associated with each
scenario.[^148]

Our particular interest was whether broadband delivery of services and
the conveniences of online transactions might alleviate some of the
day-to-day difficulties associated with remote living. For instance,
could it minimize the expense of travelling into town, or overcome
difficulties in carrying out personal or household administration?
Rather than treat the issue of remote living as one of citizenry rights
and entitlements, we focused instead on the more mundane dimensions of
remote community life.[^149] Understanding the tangible benefits of
internet use required knowing the extent to which residents moved
between town and community, why they did so, and whether internet access
and use altered patterns of movement in and out of each locality.

The frequency with which people travel and move also influences
infrastructure and hardware choices. If travel was a common feature of
everyone’s life, then this might explain why fixed satellite connections
and desktop computers were scarce in remote communities when we
commenced (as these cannot easily be moved). As we were to discover,
mobility did affect internet access and use, not only for those who
moved in and out of their community, but also for individuals and whole
families moving to different houses within the community. The latter
turned out to be a more significant issue for understanding the digital
divide, adding further to our doubts about the appropriateness of the
extant satellite internet offerings as a solution for remote consumers.

### Cost-saving and Geographic Disadvantage

It was often the case that, however many messages we sent by email or
through calling public phones, and however much we checked potential
competing activities, some, or even all, of the community members
wouldn’t be there on our visits. They had other priorities and many
reasons to travel. Native title and royalty meetings invariably had more
clout than our visits; sorry business (funeral rites) would lay heavy
and unexpected claims on people’s time. On one trip, the Imangara people
had gone to Lake Nash for a funeral and a sing-along, and then travelled
on to a rodeo at Mt Isa.

At the project’s outset, we anticipated, like Rhonda, that participants
would save on transport costs as they would have less need to travel to
regional centers and hub communities because they could access banking
and services and shop online. We asked the residents whether having a
computer reduced the frequency with which they travelled into town.

At Imangara some commented that there wasn’t ‘much need’ for community
members to go to Tennant Creek or Alice Springs because of the proximity
of the station store (1 kilometer away) and Ali Curung (35 kilometers
away), where they could shop. However, they observed that now that they
could check their balances online, they didn’t have to go into town to
bank. One man said he transferred money into his wife’s bank account
over the internet, whereas previously he would have travelled to Alice
Springs to withdraw money. Two of the community’s more adept computer
users (Emily and another young mother), said that they did not visit
town as often now that they had computers.

For Imangara residents, goods purchased at the station store and at
nearby Ali Curung were expensive. A 2009 Commonwealth inquiry into
remote community stores reported that a basket of food cost around 30
per cent more in very remote communities than in the cities.[^150]
Although freight refrigeration might explain the margin on food, even
non-perishable goods tend to be more expensive. On one trip, Mary, a
grandmother, complained to us about the cost of a child’s mattress,
pointing out that she paid over \$100 for a piece of foam. As a result
of this purchase, she said she had no money left for necessities that
week.

The younger women in the community had meanwhile been buying children’s
toys and clothes online. Emily and the other young mother had taught
themselves online shopping, having only had some introductory computer
skills sessions with us. Emily said that she had ‘worked out how to shop
for clothes, runners, toys and other small purchases for the kids
online, at eBay, etc.,’ which were delivered to the neighbouring cattle
station 1 kilometer away. They both commented that they’d started
shopping online to make ‘less trips to shops in Tennant Creek’, and
because it was ‘easier than going into town; \[there was\] more choice.’
A man at Imangara even bought a car from Adelaide on the website Gumtree
fairly early in the project. Other community members followed suit; they
were able to shop around for vehicles online, avoiding high mark-ups on
cars at ‘shark’ dealers in town known to exploit Aboriginal
people.[^151]

Some participants wanted to learn how to shop online, but ran into
difficulties because they didn’t have a debit or credit card, or they
found having several passwords for different accounts confusing (a
situation not uncommon amongst mainstream ICT users). In Mungalwurru a
woman remarked: ‘I’ve got Facebook; I’ve got eBay. I get mixed up with
all these passwords. So I just gave up’. Two-stage verification, which
is becoming the norm for accessing accounts when the user has forgotten
his/her password, is not possible in communities where there is no
mobile reception.

Overall, community members at Mungalawarru were less successful in
learning to shop online, although there was probably less incentive for
them to learn because Tennant Creek was only 80 kilometers away, and
people frequented town for social reasons. People at Imangara, however,
had much greater distances to travel to shop in either Alice Springs or
Tennant Creek. For them, if they could not access a car or get a lift,
then the next best option would be to get the bus from Ali Curung to
Alice Springs, which costs around \$80 for a one-way trip.

While being able to purchase some items—even vehicles—over the internet
contributed to the ease and convenience of community members’ lives, and
most participants began regularly checking bank and Centrelink accounts
online, these facilities did not, as we had speculated, lead to
substantial changes in the frequency of their trips to regional centers
for all residents. In 2012, when we asked the residents how often they
visited town now that they had a home computer, almost half said they
made the trip about as often as before, and the other half said that
they travelled less or never to town. The frequency of visits varied
from daily (only residents of Mungalawarru and Kwale Kwale, both of
which are relatively close to town) to every six weeks (an Imangara
resident). The reasons most often given for visiting town were catching
up with family and friends, followed by shopping; they particularly
mentioned accessing health services, but went also to visit the Central
Land Council (CLC), banks and Centrelink, and to attend parties and
sporting events.

### Death and Relocation

In late November 2011, the CLC informed us that there had been a road
accident near the Ali Curung turnoff, which resulted in a triple
fatality and multiple critical injuries, and that the accident involved
Imangara residents. One young woman who had been closely involved with
the computer trial, including working as a research assistant for us,
was killed. We postponed our visits to Imangara, but the tragedy had a
profound and extended impact on the community. The family, which
occupied five houses in the community, initially moved out of
Imangara—some to stay with relatives at 6 Mile at Ti Tree, and others to
Utopia locations. The family’s relocation was part of the Alyawarr
practice of memory and name suppression, a deliberate process of
‘forgetting’ in order to cope with grief.[^152] Less than two months
later, the mother of the daughter also passed away. Around this time,
the family returned to Imangara because the children were not happy at
the Ti Tree school, where the other kids spoke a different language.
However, they did not return to the house where the deceased had lived.
Instead it was boarded up and scheduled for redevelopment, after which a
different family from the community would move in. The father approached
us and asked that we take the computer from the family’s original house
and remove the images, as they needed to avoid viewing images or reading
the name of the deceased.

The deaths in Imangara were a particularly tragic event that caused
major changes to house occupancy.[^153] Other instances were practical
and social rather than cultural. For instance, Mungalawurru residents
were forced to stay in Tennant Creek for a stretch of time as the roads
had flooded, and told us of being forced to walk the long distance into
town on past occasions. Some left for medical reasons (their own or
others’), or to spend time with family in other communities. A couple of
community members with young families became temporary migrants, moving
to town so their children or grandchildren could attend school. An older
man, who’d initially been fairly active in discussions about having
computers and internet access at Imangara, moved to Tennant Creek for
this purpose not long after the ICTs had been installed, as did a young
family from Mungalawurru towards the end of the project. Such temporary
relocation, of varying duration, was a recurring feature in our
interaction with the residents. As Taylor writes, ‘Much temporary
movement is generated by a spatial dichotomy between the concentration
of services and dispersion of population, with the result that regional
centers, especially in remote Australia, are net recipients of temporary
migrants’.[^154] We observed that the house in a Tennant Creek town
camp, where a close relative of the Mungalawurru residents lived, was
sometimes bursting at the seams with visitors from more remote areas,
including the Mungalawurru family members.

Some individuals were not particularly mobile, such as younger women
with families, and also older women, for whom the young women often
played a support role. Generally we found that these residents were more
likely to identify themselves as the owner of a computer, and sooner
than their more mobile counterparts. John Taylor has observed that young
Aboriginal people in very remote areas appear to be less mobile than
their counterparts in the non-Aboriginal and urban Aboriginal
populations (in terms of moving for work etc.). He attributes the
relatively low rates of out-migration by young people from remote and
very remote Aboriginal settlements to ‘a cultural setting that places
emphasis on maintaining extended kinship ties’ in which the
establishment of independent living arrangements is ‘likely to be less
of a stimulus for migration among young Aboriginal adults’.[^155]
Housing shortages, as well as high dependence on rental housing, are
further constraints.[^156]

We discovered a clear association between residents’ degree of mobility
and the likelihood that they would take up ownership of, and make use
of, the computers. As a measure, we used the number of post-installation
field visits where each individual was present in the community up to
and including the time when the formal agreement was signed.
Participants designated as exhibiting a relatively high degree of
mobility were those present for less than a third of the field visits;
those present for between one-third and two-thirds of visits, a moderate
degree of mobility; and those present for more than two-thirds of
visits, a low degree of mobility.

Overall, highly-mobile individuals tended not to take up formal
ownership of the computers (by signing an agreement stating it was their
possession) as quickly or to the same extent as those who were less
mobile. Of those who signed ownership agreements, the two-thirds who
signed agreements in the first year (nine) were all less mobile, while
the highly-mobile individuals signed the remaining third (six) towards
the end of the project. Fourteen people whom we approached to sign did
not, and these were all highly mobile. For example, one man moved to
another community by mid-November 2012 and did not return, while another
spent some months living in a different community. One individual spent
some time in gaol, and by the time he was released, someone else had
taken possession of his desktop computer. It is likely that
highly-mobile people perceived ownership of a desktop computer as
something of a tie or a constraint, indicating that internet services
that are fixed to a particular residence are not viable for a
significant proportion of people.

Almost all participants chose desktops, which do not readily lend
themselves to relocation. Mary, the senior woman at Imangara, hinted at
this when we asked her how often the young men in her community used the
computers. Gesturing at herself, her daughter, Emily, and another senior
woman, she replied, ‘we don’t move around ‘cos we got the \[satellite\]
dish on the house’, but the young men ‘move around a lot’. Mary’s house
had one of two satellite dishes at Imangara, and her dish facilitated
internet access for five other houses. Although Emily and the other
senior woman did not have satellite dishes on their houses, they also
became identified during the project as ‘the providers’ of the computers
in their respective households. All three women were also amongst the
least mobile of community members at Imangara. As Mary implied, this was
in contrast to the young men, who were highly mobile (see discussion of
gender in Chapter 7).

### Intra-community Mobility

While participants often moved out of the community, even for short
periods, they were also comparatively mobile between houses within the
communities, which sometimes resulted in them moving computers. As
mentioned above, aside from death, the habitability of houses and
buildings often played a role in families’ relocations within a
community. At Mungalawurru, for example, a family moved back into a
dwelling that had been vacant for a while after repairs to damage
(caused by wasps) were made. Participants also moved out of houses,
sometimes on a temporary basis, sometimes more permanently to another
dwelling, when housing renovations and rebuilding occurred at Imangara.

Several computers were moved within and from the communities during the
project. In some instances, we removed computers because of technical
problems, returning them to Alice Springs for repair or replacement. In
other cases, participants moved computers themselves. For instance,
after the tragedy in Imangara, we did as requested and removed the
images off the computer, taking it back to Alice Springs to do so. We
later returned the computer to the original house, as the family seemed
unsure about what to do with it. However, another family, who were not
closely related to the deceased, had since occupied the house. That
family later moved to another community, taking the computer with them.
Later, when we visited Imangara in April 2014, we found that they had
returned with the computer, and were living in another house.

In another incident at Imangara, a young woman left to live in a
community 100 kilometers away, taking her household’s computer with her.
Other community members contacted the Centre for Appropriate Technology
(CAT) expressing their concern. When we next visited Imangara, the
senior male elder made a point of saying that she should not have taken
the computer with her without consulting us. Clearly the young woman
felt she had the right to take the computer with her, and considered
that it was ‘hers’, whereas others saw it as a resource provided for
all, but also that we had some power over the situation, having given it
to the family in the first instance. Of the computers remaining at
Mungalawarru, the only computer to ‘stay put’ in one house throughout
the project was owned by the resident we most often found at home in the
community (see Appendix 2).

### Location and the Need for Greater Flexibility

Participants’ degree of mobility, both within and outside the
communities, has clear implications for ICT provision, including
ownership of and access to computers and the internet. As to be
expected, we found that less mobile participants – those more likely to
stay put – took up computer ownership and internet plans sooner and more
often than highly-mobile community members. Observing the degree and
types of mobility, and the diverse reasons for moving within and out of
the community, was revealing in other ways, providing a framework for
understanding aspects of remote community living. For instance, cultural
practices, including those associated with death, can impact
significantly on housing and infrastructure needs. In terms of shopping,
we observed how geographic isolation could lead to economic hardship (at
worst caused by exploitative practices of businesses), and that internet
access could provide people with a degree of agency over such
transactions, a topic we explore further in the next chapter.

Although we were initially interested in discovering the extent to which
internet access might reduce community members’ amount of travel and the
accompanying costs, the most significant findings related to
infrastructure and hardware. As discussed in Chapter 2, most of the
community members had opted for desktops, which they perceived as easier
to manage, both in terms of the replacement of parts and ensuring that
the computers were not taken out of the community. A family that is
moving house and wants to retain the use of the computer for internet
access must thus relocate the computer and associated accessories to a
house with an existing broadband connection.

The consequences for infrastructure arrangements are significant. For
instance, the National Broadband Network (NBN) satellite scheme entails
a fixed satellite dish and an account that is tied to a particular
dwelling. Such arrangements mean that the somewhat informal movements
within the community (such as moving in with relatives when there is no
power in one house) will require going without internet access. Those
who move a lot are not likely to enter into a contract with a retail
service provider, and will therefore go without internet, at least when
outside mobile broadband coverage. Indeed, devices such as smartphones,
tablets and laptops may have encouraged greater use of the internet for
those who travelled frequently, or had responsibilities that took them
away from home for extended durations. As the project progressed, we
noticed a significant rise in smartphones and tablets, both in the
communities and elsewhere. The evolving ecology of internet-enabled
hardware in remote communities may ultimately involve a high proportion
of mobile devices. However, the desirability of home computers should
not be underestimated, especially for those permanently living in
outstations, and who wish to manage and restrict access, or to maintain
and replace parts easily.

In terms of internet infrastructure arrangements, we concluded that the
most viable means of overcoming mobility-related barriers to internet
access is to establish community WiFi systems that would reach all
dwellings and public spaces. We discuss this issue further in Chapter 9.

<span id="_Toc419811699" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811498" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc318452853" class="anchor"></span></span></span>Chapter 5: Uses
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

On one visit, two years after the computers had arrived, a few women
were at home in Mungalawarru while the men were off mustering cattle.
Karen, a woman in her mid-20s, and one of the community’s keenest
participants, greeted us, saying that she and her three kids were about
to have health check-ups with Anyinginyi, the visiting regional
Aboriginal health service. After that, she’d have time to talk to us.

While we were waiting for Karen, we decamped to a shed, where one of the
computers had been placed for shared usage, to talk to another young
woman, who was next in line with her son and her brother-law to see the
health workers. The young woman’s skills and use of the home computer
had plateaued, like many of the participants, since the project started.
She’d worked out how to download movies from the internet, and she’d
learnt some new things, like how to import photos from a mobile phone to
the computer, and pictures and movies from the computer to a USB stick.
But otherwise, she was only using the computer for about half an hour a
week, ‘sometimes to check Centrelink BasicCards, sometimes Facebook
\[...\] I used to play games – now I \[use the computer\] for
Centrelink’. Other relatives – her partner, and her mother-in-law, who
lives in the house next door – used the computer ‘the same’ amount in
her household.

The young woman was proudest of having used the computer to download and
print out an article about her father-in-law and his participation as a
young man in a fruit-picking program in Victoria during the 1960s. Now
white-whiskered but still wearing a cowboy hat, he sat in his wheelchair
on the back veranda of a nearby house, looking out towards the road
along which the young men would later return from their day’s cattle
work.

'But I'm not really like her,' the young woman said, stabbing a finger
towards the health clinic, where Karen waited outside in the shade. ‘She
knows everything about computers.’

Karen was one of a core of residents who’d quickly become adept with the
computers, and often provided ad hoc ICT assistance for other community
members. She was also a research assistant during early interviews when
we needed someone to explain to others what we were doing (sometimes in
language). She’d maintained an enthusiasm for digital technology, making
comments less than a year after receiving a home computer such as: ‘The
only thing that stops \[me\] using it is when the power is turned off.’
By the end of 2012, she said that she would be willing to pay \$100 per
month for an internet plan for her household once the project had
finished.

When Karen joined us after her family’s check-up, she estimated that she
used the computer for two to three hours each day for games, music and
pictures, including to put these on USB sticks for others, as well as
videos for her and her children to watch. She ranked educational and
child-rearing activities as the most important uses of the computer:
‘Print ABCs for kids or 123 is number one’; download ‘kid’s music
video’, ‘kid learning to sing with action music’ featured in the top
six, along with administrative uses such as accessing bank and
Centrelink accounts.

Karen’s story, but also the other young woman’s, relates to the uses of
computers, and the ways in which the computers became ordinary features
of daily life – tools that assisted them to undertake everyday
activities. In this chapter, we discuss what residents used the internet
and computer *for*, and how this can be understood in relation to
tangible change within the residents’ daily lives, including individual
agency and enterprise. We also discuss the perceived, if not real,
threats of internet use, including concerns around cyberbullying that
emerged within the region during this time.

### Tangible Outcomes

As discussed in Chapter 2, statistical analysis of internet uses, such
as that conducted in the Netherlands by van Duersen and van Dijk, have
set out to determine whether there are correlations in what people use
the internet for and factors such as age, gender and income.[^157] They
found that those higher up the ladder are likely to undertake
self-development online activities, and thus may profit more from
internet use.

However, evidence of unequal participation across large data sets cannot
tell us about the relationship of online use to resulting changes in an
individual’s life. As Helsper writes, highlighting the complexity of the
area: ‘Only when digital experiences are relevant to everyday
situations, if they are positive in nature and only if the person feels
that online actions lead to the reactions/actions of others, will
digital inclusion influence social inclusion.’[^158]

When we asked community members in our initial discussions how they
would find out simple information such as weather forecasts, road
conditions or football scores, they commonly said they would access such
information on the television (where available and not necessarily their
own) and by word of mouth. Some people said they would use the
telephone, but this was far from straightforward (see telephone
situation in Chapter 2). The only person amongst the three communities
who was using computers at work told us that she printed out information
‘like a leaflet’ to give to others. A man commented that you had to be
careful not to ‘shoot the messenger’ if you wanted to know what was
going on.

To gain some insights into what they most valued using the computers and
internet access for by the project’s end, on our final trips to the
communities in April 2014, we asked participants what was the *first
thing* they did when they logged onto their computers. Most responses
fell evenly within the categories of either functional (Centrelink;
Gumtree) or entertainment activities (movies, games, listening to songs,
YouTube). These categories were similar to those that emerged when the
residents were asked almost eighteen months earlier in November 2012
what activities they used the computers and internet for (see Appendix
3, Figure 1a). This suggests that their main areas of use hadn’t changed
significantly in that time. The community members’ reported in November
2012 that usage for banking, downloading music, and viewing videos and
photos were also amongst the types of activities they thought the
computers and internet would be useful for at the project’s start. As
discussed further below, use of the internet for email communication and
educational purposes was fairly modest.

In order to confirm uses, we took data off the filter for a sub-set of
the computers (with the permission of the owner of that computer) and
analyzed what websites people were visiting the most. Around half of the
websites visited we categorized as ‘miscellaneous’ sites, and search was
regularly used to find information. The second-largest group of websites
visited were videos, followed by religious sites and shopping. These
uses indicate that the internet was a continuation of everyday
activities for the residents, occurring within the same spread of
priorities and concerns they had before the computers arrived, rather
than seeking out new opportunities. For instance, although online
education was theoretically accessible to residents, none took it up
(although computers were used for existing educational activities,
including supplementing kids’ school work in the form of educational
games).

When seen in the context of life in remote communities, these uses are
providing a level of autonomy over personal affairs that was difficult
for them to achieve before. The young woman from Mungalawurru, while
waiting in the queue for her health check, said that having internet in
the community had been ‘all right’, but that it hasn’t made ‘much
difference’. She also told us, however, that she was relying on Facebook
to keep up with family and friends outside Mungalawarru, ‘now the phone
isn’t working’ (the community’s public telephone was on the blink). She
looked up the *Tennant Times* online on Fridays to see what was
happening in town on the weekend. She could also transfer ‘kid’s money’
(parenting payments) over the internet on the weekend, whereas she could
only do it by phone before Friday at 5pm. Although she said the internet
hadn’t made much difference to life in the community, her comments
suggested that the convenience, agency and autonomy it provided in
accessing services and information, and in keeping up with friends and
family, had become a matter-of-course by then for active participants
like her, impacting in subtle, yet important, ways on her lifestyle.

The high interest in religious websites also reflected community
activities and priorities at the time. Residents used the computers for
personal and community-based religious activities such as downloading
and playing gospel songs, printing out posters, and producing songbooks
to use in the local church. It was not uncommon to find a picture of
Jesus, printed on a home computer and captioned with, ‘He is coming’,
taped to a community member’s front door, or to see Christian
iconography used as a screensaver. One woman reported doing a Bible
study online with someone in Mexico. On some of our visits, we were told
that various people were absent because they were attending a sing-along
or a gospel meeting at another community. On our last trip to
Mungalawarru, a man who’d experienced a conversion during a stint in
prison was reading the Bible on his house’s verandah while listening to
Warlpiri, Pitjantjatjara and Waramunga gospel music he’d downloaded onto
a USB stick. He told us that it had changed his life for the better,
including leading him to sobriety.

Although we were not clear on the extent of it, we knew that
missionaries had been using ICTs to reach out to these communities,
particularly through music sharing. In previous chapters, we have
discussed how various programs have resulted in a patchwork of
infrastructures in remote communities, resulting in different types of
access and levels of adoption. The same can be observed at the level of
uses, with short-term or ongoing programs encouraging or enabling
certain uses in particular localities. For instance, the cultural
archive Ara Irititja appears popular amongst the Ngaanyatjarra,
Pitjantjatjara and Yankunytjatjara people for whom it was created, but
no such online archive exists for the language groups we were working
with.[^159] As discussed further in the next chapter, Inge Kral observed
the popularity of GarageBand (sound mixing) software in Wingelina, where
a media center was active in music development at the time.[^160] Other
programs have focused on the use of computers as part of diversionary
youth programs. In Chapter 9, we discuss how internet use at the Papunya
computer room differed from what we observed in the outstations,
possibly due to a history of creative enterprise in that community, as
well as greater access to face-to-face services and the circumstances
surrounding its establishment. Keeping these differences in mind, the
idea that use can be linked to cultural characteristics separate from
the contemporary cultural landscape of remote communities is flawed.
Internet use reflects daily life, but also the various activities and
programs of outsiders that work in communities – including religious
organizations.

### Online Banking and Money Management

A year after the computers were installed, Mary asked us how to check
her BasicsCard balance online: ‘I don’t want to have to ask the woman at
the store to check it for me anymore’, she told us. After a lengthy wait
on the Centrelink helpline – in the freezing wind on the community’s
only telephone – we managed to set her up with an online account and
showed her how to log on using her home computer. The satellite internet
speed was so slow that the site’s security system kept locking us out
(the communities had not yet moved to the National Broadband Network
(NBN) Interim Satellite Scheme, which provides faster internet); and
once we did get in, the website was unnecessarily complex. Regardless,
Mary was willing to try to navigate the site in order to have some level
of financial control, even if it was simply to know how much money was
available that day.

In the previous chapter, we discussed how online banking reduced travel
for some. Banking also provided a level of control over finances that is
significant, given that Aboriginal people living in remote areas are the
most ‘underbanked’ in the country. A study by Vinita Godinho has looked
at the reasons for underbanking, and found that money is regularly
shared amongst a wide network of kin, and that many people see money as
a problem, lacking the financial knowledge to control it.[^161] In
addition, ‘Lower levels of access and usage of information and
communications technology (ICT) combined with lower digital literacy
further restrict Indigenous financial inclusion, by limiting their
ability to access electronic banking delivery channels’.[^162]

In our first meetings with the communities, residents identified banking
as one of the main services they’d like to access online. At the time,
less than 20 per cent of participants had used internet banking, and
around half expressed an interest in doing so.[^163] A woman who was
involved in a financial literacy organization did not know how to use
internet banking, but wanted to learn. By the end of the project, all
regular adult internet users were using online banking. Even an old man,
who had shown no interest in computers and declined the offer of having
one in his house, was asking for assistance from others for
money-related purposes.[^164]

When we commenced the project, those living in remote communities were
known to be paying more for banking than other Australians.[^165] A 2011
Department of Treasury Taskforce on ATMs in remote communities found
that there was a tendency amongst this population to check balances and
make withdrawals frequently, and that this resulted in significant
costs, as consumers in remote communities did not have a choice of ATMs
as do those in larger towns. Independent ATM providers owned nearly 80
per cent of to the 600 ATMs in remote communities across the country at
the time we commenced our study, and were depending on revenue from
these ATMs (usually \$2 per transaction). The taskforce report found
that people were often checking balances and making withdrawals for
various reasons, including the inability to store food and therefore a
need to shop on a daily basis, the obligation to give money to relatives
acting as a disincentive to hold large amounts of money at a time, and
low withdrawal limits on ATMs if cash was in short supply.[^166] The
taskforce also found ‘many more balance enquiries relative to
withdrawals than the Australian average’, which was likely caused by not
knowing when Centrelink payments or direct debits would be made.[^167]
The report noted that those living in remote communities were either
unable or unwilling to use internet banking. As a result of the
Taskforce, the Australian Bankers Association put forward a proposal to
eliminate fees on withdrawals and balance enquiries at selected ATMs in
remote communities, and this was accepted by the competition regulator
in late 2012.

A significant and controversial change in how welfare was administered
in remote Northern Territory communities also had consequences for
personal finance control. As part of the Northern Territory Emergency
Response (the Intervention, 2007-2012), welfare recipients in prescribed
communities were subject to new measures from 2007 that meant that part
of their payments (50-70 per cent) were quarantined and could only be
spent on ‘basics’. To spend that money, individuals would use a
BasicsCard to buy groceries and approved items (not alcohol or
cigarettes, for instance) through an EFTPOS-style system. People were
automatically enrolled in the scheme, although they could apply to be
made exempt from it, assessed on whether their children were attending
school regularly, and whether they were shown by Centrelink to have
reasonable financial stability.

We did not ask the residents about their spending and withdrawal
practices. However, it was clear that the ability to check online
banking and BasicsCard balances offered significant convenience to
community members, as they could avoid the time-consuming processes
involved in contacting services by phone. It was not uncommon to see
people sitting around the sole community phone on old chairs, sometimes
in harsh sunlight or in strong winds, or in the mud if the weather had
been wet, for lengthy periods. Accessing social security services via
satellite broadband at home was also cheaper than doing so by mobile
phone, as 1800 numbers were metered at that time (Telstra, the sole
provider in most remote areas, has since made 1800 numbers free for
mobiles).

As early as February 2012, residents began mentioning using the internet
to access these services, with comments like those from two young women
at Imangara that they went online ‘definitely once a week on “payday” to
check their keycard’, or ‘I access Centrelink every day’, becoming
increasingly common. Women tended to make greater use of the computers
and internet access for household administrative activities than men
(discussed further in Chapter 7). Karen observed the relative
accessibility of the home computers to us, saying that while a couple of
people kept wanting to come into town to check their Centrelink account,
‘I tell them to get registered, just phone them \[Centrelink\] then get
back on the computer.’

This use of the home computers and the internet to access services
online might suggest increasing the ease of access by government for the
control and surveillance of remote Aboriginal people’s daily lives.
Lattas and Morris (2010) have described how the State’s implementation
of measures such as the BasicsCard through the Northern Territory
Intervention increased the ‘forms of sociocultural surveillance and
policing that seek to instil new cultural habits’ within Indigenous
lives in an ‘urgent need to normalise Indigenous familial relations of
reciprocity’.[^168] At a more general level, governments have
historically led the digital divide agenda. It aligns with efficiency
measures, as well as an internal bureaucratic push for data-driven
policy.[^169] These motivations spur a wide-reaching range of
technological changes that do not always serve the citizens whom they
are purportedly supposed to be helping.

Nonetheless, the greater reach and accessibility of online government
services available through home ICTs can also be seen within the broader
canvas of increasing online participation for Aboriginal people, and
potentially removing barriers to social inclusion. Discussing the impact
of the introduction of cheap mobile phones to India, Robin Jeffrey and
Assa Doron observe how ‘the mobile phone offered greater potential to
connect people regularly to state institutions’, and that it ‘drew
India’s people into relations with the record-keeping capitalist state
more comprehensively than any previous mechanism or technology’.[^170]
This is offset, however, by the democratic nature of mobile phones in
enabling vast numbers of people, from across different classes and
hierarchies, and different genders, to become part of a network society.
Jeffrey and Doron stress the democratization of information-sharing that
has become possible through this cheap and simple form of ICT access, as
well as other capabilities such as increased capacity to connect,
mobilize and broadcast, improving citizens’ ability to advocate for
improved governance.[^171] While ‘none of this \[has\] overturned power
structures or ironed out inequality yet,’ Jeffrey and Doron comment that
‘it did make conditions “faster, more efficient and” – a matter of hope
and promise – “more democratic”’.[^172]

### Enterprise Development

Altman describes the ‘hybrid’ set of economic and administrative
variables underpinning the fabric of outstation settlements as a
combination of state sector, private sector and customary economic
activities (for instance, land management and visual art).[^173]

The hybrid economy was visible within all three communities insofar as
residents supported themselves on a mixture of social security payments
and local employment. The cattle project at Mungalawarru, aspirations to
develop cultural tourism at Kwale Kwale, and bush foods at Imanagara
were instances of the customary activities that represented the
possibility of enterprise. One question we had was whether improved
telecommunications could assist these ‘off-the-grid’ communities in
developing a base for economic sustainability, assisting Aboriginal
people to live on their traditional lands.

Initially, several residents within the communities expressed interest
in using the computers for local cultural, social and/or economic
enterprises. At Kwale Kwale, Rhonda said she wished to use the computer
and printer to self-publish cultural resources, and to keep the books
for a cultural tourism enterprise. Another man who ran a youth respite
service suggested he might use a computer to keep a database tracking
outcomes across five projects. Mungalawarru residents were interested in
keeping a database of stock for their cattle business on their
computers, and a local artist wanted to use the internet to liaise with
Barkly Arts to display her work.

However, the enterprises that were occurring had administrative
assistance from outsiders, and these were the individuals who generally
made use of the computers and internet for business-related purposes. A
church worker who assisted the man running the youth respite center used
his computer, and when the live-in visitor moved on, the man did not use
the computer at all. While individuals mentioned using the computer and
printer for individual and family-oriented purposes such as printing out
‘kids’ stories, put\[ting\] them in folders’, and or historical
documents they found on the net,[^174] very few reported using the
computer equipment in a work-related context, such as for printing out
spread-sheets.

Given the lack of infrastructure and skills base that small settlements
such as outstations possess, it would have been unrealistic to expect
economic and/or creative ventures to emerge during the timespan of the
project simply through access to ICTs. Kwale Kwale was one community
where this seemed possible, but again outsiders had significant
influence in determining how and when that occurred.

During the years that we visited Kwale Kwale, we witnessed various
efforts towards enterprise development, and even community
self-sustainability. At times community members were enthusiastic at the
prospect of using the internet for enterprise purposes, while at other
times the computers and internet were cast aside.

In October 2011, we were told that the Apostolic (Baptist) church was
providing resources to partly refurbish some houses, and to build a
small backpacker camping ground, a vegie garden and a shop. The
computers were initially seen as an asset in this overall plan. By early
2012, considerable work had been done, and we were told that the
community was aiming for self-sufficiency over 10 years. The church
members were living onsite, and appeared to have a significant influence
in guiding the direction of the community, although it was difficult to
ascertain whether the ideas were coming from the church or from the
community. A few months later, one of the visiting pastors advised us
that the computers had been declared off-limits in order to stop kids
from playing games, and to prevent any other inappropriate use. At the
pastor’s request, we took the computers away to ‘clean’ them, but found
no evidence of inappropriate material, and both machines still had their
filters set to ‘child’ (the highest level of filtering).

By September 2012, there was a sign by the turn-off to Kwale Kwale that
read, ‘Art for sale’, and the vegetable patch was producing crops that
were consumed by the residents during an evening meal organized by the
pastor. The elder woman in the community, while painting gumnuts, told
us that she wanted the children to be able to play games, and that it
wasn’t up to the pastor to determine what the children did. One of the
derelict houses was undergoing repairs for an intended arts center. The
work had been carried out by the church members, with some assistance
from the residents, and we were informed that Rhonda was the driving
force behind the project. The next stage of the project would be to
build a walking trail for tours, and to establish a restaurant and small
caravan park. While relaying this, the pastor asked that two computers
originally placed in the community shed be returned – one of the
computers into the building being refurbished for the arts center for
use by the business, and the other to a house for one of the residents
to use. These moves required some significant reconfiguring of the
technical arrangements, which CAT set about organizing. While one
computer was eventually moved into the resident’s house, months later it
seemed that progress on the art gallery had stalled due to lack of
money, and the community’s artists had begun making their art work and
selling it through Tangentyere Art Centre. Over time, our visits to
Kwale Kwale slowed compared to the other two communities. Rhonda, who
had access to computers at work, requested assistance from us from time
to time, but we received mixed messages as to the value and use of the
computers in Kwale Kwale. No-one chose to continue a subscription to
internet services at the completion of the funded period.

The church’s involvement in the community was an instance of the
non-government sector stepping in to assist in the absence of other
programs. The moral influence of the church may have been a factor in
the community’s oscillating attitudes towards ICTs and how they should
best be provided. Although it was not possible to fully know how these
events were impacting on the community, Kwale Kwale does illustrate the
ways in which some communities are actively pursuing enterprise and
sustainability, in this case with assistance from willing workers and
missionaries. As mentioned previously, downloading Aboriginal gospel
music was popular in both Imangara and Mungalawurru, and the influence
of various Christian churches was apparent throughout the region.[^175]

Meanwhile, the man living on the far side of the community – the only
resident who had his own computer and internet when we commenced – had
developed a substantial tomato garden, and was selling to Alice Springs
caterers. The other enterprise, a youth respite center, continued to
operate intermittently over this time.

### Email and Social Networking

In July 2012, Karen at Mungalawurru announced to us: ‘I don’t run up to
answer the phone because I get email’. Like her comments about the
convenience of having a home computer to check online banking and
Centrelink accounts, she’d realised it was easier to rely on email for
communications than on the community payphone. Karen described emailing
more people, maybe five a week, and receiving emails from the cattle
project, the CLC and friends. But she was also one of a handful of
residents on whom organizations like the CLC and CAT relied to
communicate with the community about matters such as scheduling visits.

Although people identified contacting friends and family outside the
community as one of the main advantages of having ICT access, extensive
social use of email did not develop during the project. It soon became
apparent that apart from having the basic applications, both parties
needed ready access to the internet to have the regular habit of
checking their email, and to leave their Skype application turned on.
Initially, we tried to speed up the process by passing on to the
residents the email addresses of regular contacts (a local accountant,
CLC, Barkly Arts), with their permission. We also tried to increase
community members’ familiarity with e-communication by activating
programs such as Outlook and Skype at start-up, and by regularly sending
email messages to all the computers to maximize their chance of being
read. Co-author Andrew Crouch at CAT received some emails from Imangara
in the next few months, with queries like: ‘How can I do such-and-such
\[…\]’ or, ‘How can I obtain a Hotmail account?’, which he was able to
resolve online. In total, between when the computers were installed in
2011 and the end of 2012, Andrew had only a total of only 109 emails
from residents, either initiated by them or in response to an email he
sent. Nonetheless, when asked whom they emailed, those using email
mostly responded that Andrew was the main person they liaised with. It
seemed the main reason why e-communication did not emerge as one of the
major uses of ICT was because people didn’t have friends and family
outside the communities with functional email accounts.

Given that the use of email is somewhat waning as a form of online
communication, it is more likely that social media will be the dominant
means of connecting with outside networks and finding information,
particularly amongst younger people.[^176] Use of social media in the
project was fairly modest. While social media users reported spending
significant amounts of time on Facebook, only ten community members said
they regularly accessed Facebook and other social networking sites such
as Divas Chat[^177], and several more said they wished to learn, or had
forgotten how to use, social media. Unsurprisingly, social media users
were also youthful: most were women aged 18-29 years, plus a man in the
same age group, a teenage girl and two women in their 30s.

Facebook appeared to become increasingly popular as a form of
communication amongst remote central Australian Aboriginal populations
during 2013 and 2014. For example, when we visited the Papunya Computer
Room in May 2012, almost no-one was using Facebook. However, two years
later, the computer room staff claimed that: ‘Everyone has a Facebook
account. It's the easiest way to communicate with outside’; and: ‘They
talk to friends in other parts of Australia. Facebook Hermannsburg,
South Australia, Santa Teresa’. In the Remote Indigenous Public Internet
Access’ (RIPIA’s) *Cyber Safety Program Report*, which interviewed
people in six central Australian remote communities, including Ali
Curung and Papunya, 37 per cent of participants ‘claimed they/and or
their family members enjoy using social media for keeping in touch with
friends and family, while 40 per cent claim they do not know why people
like it or find it useful’.[^178] When we discussed ICT use with Ali
Curung community members in October 2013, roughly half of those we
interviewed who were using the internet at the time said they used a
social media site such as Facebook or Divas Chat.[^179] A woman told us
that she would often ask neighbours via Facebook whether they had any
sugar or tea rather than walk over to their house.

In late 2013, workers in Tennant Creek local agencies and organizations
told us that they were now ‘Facebooking’ clients from in town and remote
communities because it was the quickest way of contacting them: ‘It’s
much easier to use social networking to find people.’ One interviewee
said that 90 per cent of her communication with board and staff in the
community organization where she worked ‘is text-based \[i.e. via mobile
phone\] or is messaged via Facebook’.

A survey by a commercial research agency, McNair Ingenuity Research
(2014), also observed the prevalence and popularity of Facebook usage
amongst Indigenous Australians, particularly in remote areas, noting
that: ‘First Australians are significantly more likely to join and
participate in Facebook than the overall population’, with ‘six-in-ten
adult Indigenous Australians us\[ing\] facebook, compared to 42 per cent
of adult Australians nationally’. At 44 per cent, Facebook usage amongst
remote Indigenous people was ‘slightly above the overall national
average’, even though home computer usage was low, and ADSL was often
unavailable: people generally accessed the internet on mobile
phones.[^180] Urban Indigenous scholar Bronwyn Carlson has also
documented an increasing trend amongst Indigenous Australians to use
Facebook ‘to build, display, and perform Aboriginal identities’, as a
‘key self-representational tool’.[^181]

### Kids and ICT Usage

When we asked community members in our early discussions whether they
thought having computers would be good for children, most were positive
about their educational value for young people. They did not express
much ‘worry about kids’ regarding what they might access online;
instead, they were concerned about addiction to games and time-wasting
behavior. Adults thought kids were pests when it came to media devices,
especially as they ‘get upset when they don’t get to use it’. They also
spoke of kids bugging them to play games on mobile phones, and of
locking their games console away, saying they would do the same with a
computer when they had one and, as discussed in Chapter 3, they began to
set passwords to restrict access to computers later in the project.

Once the computers were installed, adults had mixed responses to
children’s use of them, some expressing surprise at their aptitude on
the computers; others complaining about time-wasting. Adults described
the children using the computers for both educational and entertainment
purposes, including playing games, internet browsing, Indigitube,[^182]
downloading photos and drawing pictures. Playing games was by far the
most popular use (50 per cent) of the computers for children, with
frequent mentions of educational games, particularly a maths game. Young
women often described activities on the computers involving kids, such
as ‘play music video for kids’, ‘kids write stories’, ‘kids do
paintings’ and ‘kids play educational games’. Emily showed us books with
photos and stories that she had created with her children on the home
computer. Several people also thought kids’ activities on the household
computers supplemented schoolwork: ‘Yes!—counting, alphabet’, and ‘Kids
use at school, then come home and use. Has been helping for maths and
reading’.

When we asked community members whether they thought computers had been
a source of time-wasting, some disagreed, saying they ‘just sit there
for a little while and then run around’, ‘spend most time outside, only
on computer a bit’, ‘probably about half an hour, then go out and play’.
Just under a third, all young adults, who were also most often the
parents of young children, gave an unqualified ‘yes’ in response.
Children using up the internet quota or power was, however, a continuing
source of irritation, with one man remarking that his household needed
to ‘manage power use’ as a result of kids’ frequent computer use. As
part of its Codey cybersmart project, arts provider Barkly Arts produced
an educational poster captioned: ‘Plugging in your phone at home to get
on the Internet uses power and costs money. Power at home is for
everyone to share and must be respected.’[^183] As discussed in Chapter
3, towards the end of the project, people commented that they’d put
passwords on their computers to regulate kids’, as well as visitors’ and
other residents’ use of them, so that they would not use up all the
power when they were away from the community. They also mentioned
locking the desktop lid, so that kids did not ‘always use it’, and
providing adult supervision to kids: I ‘encourage them to behave
properly/set some rules—e.g. switch on and off properly’, and they can
use the computer ‘when I’m around, yes, but not when I’m not around’.

### Cyber-safety

In our initial conversations with the communities, their concern about
potential cyber-safety issues was low, and difficult to gauge compared
to their quite strong opinions about time-wasting activities. By
contrast, a 2010 report commissioned by the Australian Media and
Communications Authority (ACMA) found that 71 per cent of Australian
parents ‘were concerned about cyber-safety, with 32% of this group
reporting that they were “very concerned”’.[^184] Notably, most
Australian parents were regularly using the internet (88 per cent) and
accessing the internet from home at least several times a week (81 per
cent) in comparison with the outstation residents at that time. It was
possible that adult community members’ limited exposure to ICTs was the
main reason for their lack of concern about cyber-safety.

The term ‘cyber-safety’ encompasses the protection of internet users
from online risks and security breaches such as ‘exposure to illegal or
inappropriate material, stranger danger, identity theft, invasion of
privacy, harassment and cyber-bullying’.[^185] Cyber-bullying refers
more specifically to incidents of harassment, usually involving sending
messages (text and images) via the internet or mobile phones to other
parties. [^186] While the more dramatic and disturbing aspects of
cyber-safety are often quick to capture public attention, these are
symptomatic of a range of issues relating to online literacy.

Currently, little research is available on the nature and extent of
cyber-safety issues in remote Aboriginal communities, although there is
a growing body of national and international academic and policy
literature, such as *EU Kids Online* and its Australian counterpart, *AU
Kids Online*, and reports by the Australian government’s Joint Select
Committee on Cyber-Safety.[^187] Some limited reporting on cyber-safety
in remote northern Australia appears in the Commonwealth Department of
Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs (FaHCSIA)’s
*Community Safety and Wellbeing Research Study*, which surveyed
seventeen Aboriginal communities across the Northern Territory between
December 2010 and June 2011, with 76 per cent of respondents classifying
nasty phone texts as a ‘very big’ or ‘big’ problem.[^188] Similarly,
RIPIA’s *Cyber Safety Program Report* identified ‘swearing and
arguments’ online as the most common cyber-safety-related problem.[^189]

We did hear concern expressed about potential and actual outbreaks of
cyber-bullying in central Australia. When we visited Papunya in May
2012, some elders were worried about cyber-bullying occurring if mobile
phone towers were installed in the community (which did not happen until
2014). They said being at Papunya gave young people a break from the
‘trash talk’ on mobile phones that went on when they were in Alice
Springs and Tennant Creek, and they didn’t want conflict emerging from
cyber-bullying and sexting in their community.

They were particularly aware of how cyber-bullying had fed conflict
between two camps aligned with different families in Yuendumu, a major
Aboriginal community 262 kilometers drive away, which were exacerbated
when people from Hermannsburg (420 kilometers from Yuendumu) began to
send inflammatory phone messages. Some of these were sent anonymously
through false identities created on the social media platform Divas Chat
(airG) using the names of deceased relatives from the other camp, a
highly provocative gesture, given the restrictions in local Aboriginal
culture on naming or viewing images of the dead. Ultimately, the
situation was managed with the assistance of the Australian Federal
Police and ISP providers to identify and close the social networking
accounts of people sending offensive messages, and to appoint monitors
(e.g. ‘Diva Cops’) in chat rooms to identify and report potential
concerns.[^190]

At Ali Curung, the women who assisted us with our survey also expressed
concern about cyber-bullying, commenting that it was a problem amongst
young people, but also that social networking sites like Facebook were
causing domestic problems for couples, presumably due to jealousy (an
observation confirmed by the local Policeman). Although the women asked
us to include questions related to cyber-safety in our survey of
eighty-five Ali Curung residents, we found that any direct line of
questioning on the topic closed down discussion almost immediately, and
we all agreed to cease raising it in our interviews.

Tennant Creek provides a hub for many residents from Aboriginal
settlements in the surrounding Barkly region, which has a population of
7,500, approximately 70 per cent of whom are Indigenous. We began to
hear from local organizations that some Aboriginal elders and parents
were disturbed by reports that kids had been involved in cyber-bullying,
something they knew little about. Children had been texting each other
during school hours, with physical fights erupting from arguments
online. Sometimes, older relatives weighed into kids’ spats on Facebook;
on other occasions, the conflict spread beyond families to communities
outside Tennant Creek, to people they might have met once or twice, and
even to total strangers. As at Yuendumu, people set up false profiles on
social media using names and images of the deceased to taunt others.

Most of the activity was associated with mobile phones, and some kids
from nearby communities without mobile coverage were going to great
lengths to access social media. In some cases, kids stole their parents’
cars and drove to get service to be able to text their girlfriends or
find out the footy scores, so keen were they to keep up with what was
happening. There were also stories of inter-racial cyber-bullying
erupting around tension at football matches, and of racist comments
being posted on Facebook walls, especially under photos of different
racial groups in Tennant Creek.[^191]

To follow up on these concerns, we spoke to a number of professionals,
including lawyers, police, teachers, youth workers and other community
workers at Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal social service, arts and
educational agencies at Tennant Creek, and at three other remote
communities in the Barkly region. Because of the high degree of
sensitivity surrounding research using Indigenous subjects, and because
of our experience in Ali Curung, we thought it was better to proceed by
canvassing a group of professionals first to gauge how serious an issue
cyber-bullying was in the area.[^192] We were interested in what forms
it took (whether it was confined to bullying or took other forms like
security threats), what responses had been developed, and what
implications there might be for Aboriginal people’s access to the ICTs.
Tennant Creek was an appropriate location for this research, not only
because of the local reports of cyber-bullying, but also because of its
centrality to Aboriginal people in the region, and because the town had
long possessed mobile coverage.

Most interviewees did not think the incidence of cyber-bullying in
Tennant Creek ‘was different to anywhere else’, and emphasized that
cyber-safety was a problem worldwide, and not limited to particular race
or community groups. Texting and messaging provided the main avenues for
cyber-bullying in the Tennant Creek survey, particularly on social
networking platforms Divas Chat and Facebook.

On our last visit to Mungalawarru, which does not have mobile access, a
middle-aged woman told us she wasn’t interested in using social media,
because it caused too much fighting, and told us how when she’d stayed
with family in a mid-sized town, her nieces had been arguing on Facebook
even though they were in the same house. In Tennant Creek, young women,
from 10 years old through to high-school age, were described as tending
‘to be more bitchy and more often on social media’ and ‘to be a bit more
technically functional’ than young men, who were described as ‘more
reserved’ in commenting, but more sexually forthright in their content.
Similarly, FaHCSIA’s *Community Safety and Wellbeing Research Study*
reported that cyber-bullying was ‘particularly problematic for young
girls’, and that it emerged in contexts such as same-sex fights
(including ‘jealousing’ fights between girls over boyfriends and boys
teasing each other), between couples and amongst groups of young men and
women in communities’.[^193] The RIPIA Report also identified
‘\[f\]emale dominated social networking service use’ as ‘the group most
commonly experiencing problems’, with ‘jealousing’ as ‘an issue voiced
overwhelmingly by females (78%)’.[^194] Sexting, by contrast, was
negligible, being ‘recognised and voiced as a problem only by males, at
just 2% of the response’.[^195]

Although older people were reportedly mystified by local outbursts of
cyber-bullying, they could also be implicated in online fights via their
children. A school representative explained: ‘Often what happens as well
is that parents will get on their kids’ accounts and write things back.
I’ve had that before actually where on Facebook they said, “But
such-and-such’s mum was there giving me a serve”, and all sorts of
things.’

Older, remote communities were said to be particularly vulnerable to
online frauds and scams, tending to take offers of financial
remuneration over the internet at face value. A project officer for a
royalties organization said: ‘We have those all the time. The number of
scams that are going on at any given time \[…\] We have old ladies
saying, “I’m going to win a million dollars. Look at this \[…\] I’ve got
this on my phone”, and I’m like “No. Don’t reply. Don’t engage”. They
just don’t understand that it’s not – it’s coming on a phone, it’s
\[not\] coming on an official \[basis\].’

Despite the emergence of cyber-safety and related issues in Tennant
Creek, no-one suggested that social media and digital technology should
be banned: instead they thought internet connectivity had too many
benefits for remote populations for its use to be restricted. Elders and
older generations decided they needed to become ‘digi-smart’ to engage
with the emerging local cyber-culture: ‘We need to understand more about
the digital world, or otherwise, get rid of it. And obviously, we can’t
get rid of it because it’s here and it’s important. It will just mean
people are becoming further and further away from what the rest of the
world is sort of doing.’

The key issues identified in our Tennant Creek research and in the RIPIA
report indicate that digital literacy and proficiency are the crux of
the matter for remote Aboriginal people in responding to cyber-safety.
In particular, the privacy problems posed by social media are not well
understood: people in remote communities are often unaware that ‘anybody
in the world can see them’ online. A youth worker in a Barkly community
said that ‘nobody has privacy settings and nobody wants them’, even
though she’d tried to persuade people of the value of using them on
Facebook. She described how: ‘Someone might post on Facebook at three in
the morning saying: “I’m going to have a sniff now” or a drink, and
everyone in the community will read it.’ A woman at Ali Curung told us
that she changed her sim card in her phone regularly so she would not
have to receive and read text messages intended for others. This was
because of the high prevalence of phone sharing.

Another privacy concern was young people’s lack of awareness of the
potential impact of having a digital footprint on their employment
prospects: **‘**Young people don’t realize how being on Facebook will
impact on them’, a senior Aboriginal woman said. ‘They have no
understanding of the “digital footprint” they’re leaving – the fact
they’ll never lose it and it may even affect their employability. There
are enough barriers to Aboriginal employment already.’ These
privacy-based issues relate in turn to remote Aboriginal people’s lower
levels of digital and English literacy in contrast with the Australian
mainstream, along with the experience of being accelerated into ICT use
within a relatively short period.

Middle-aged and older people often expressed concern about the unguarded
online activities of Aboriginal children and youth, and a fear that
young people might be ‘tricking them’ with social media.[^196] Faced
with extensive disadvantage and a large youth population – 25 per cent
of people in the Barkly are under 17 – it’s understandable that elders,
along with schools and the community sector, fear that cyber-bullying
may exacerbate existing social problems in Tennant Creek. But many of
the anxieties about cyber-safety issues relate to the cultural and
digital disconnects between older and younger generations, and to
uncertainty about how to navigate the dynamics between these worlds. One
community worker said: ‘People split it up between their cultural
responsibilities and then their Facebook/Divas personality. But when it
suits them, they’ll be in the other world.’ This dichotomy between
digital and cultural worlds is often framed in terms of a cyber culture
identified with youth, and outside the controls and protocols of
traditional culture. This attitude is typically associated with older
Aboriginal people.

Similarly, linguistic anthropologist Inge Kral observes from her
research into remote Aboriginal youth and digital media in the
Ngaanyatjarra lands in Western Australia that the use of digital
technologies and new media ‘is defining a generational identity distinct
from that of their elders, with new media representing a site where
youths are exhibiting agency and a technological expertise that exceeds
that of the older generation’.[^197] Moreover, this notion of a
generational digital divide reflects familiar anxieties expressed by
mainstream culture within industrialized nations about younger
generations’ ready embrace of technology. Sonia Livingstone, for
example, describes these sentiments as follows: ‘It is commonly held
that at best, social networking is time-wasting and socially isolating,
and at worst it allows paedophiles to groom children in their bedroom or
sees teenagers lured into suicide pacts while parents think they are
doing their homework’.[^198] Cultural anthropologist Mizuko Ito suggests
that underlying these anxieties is the implicit intergenerational
challenge that the greater ICT facility generally associated with youth
cultures presents: ‘The discourse of digital generations and digital
youth posits that the new media empower youth to challenge the social
norms and educational agendas of their elders in unique ways.’[^199]

Organizations such as the Tennant Creek Council of Elders and Respected
Persons[^200] and Barkly Arts devised and implemented cyber-safety
strategies targeting the needs of different generational groups in the
Barkly, such as the lower levels of digital literacy among older
generations, and a lack of understanding of Aboriginal cultural
protocols amongst youth. These strategies included ‘Divas Cops’ chatroom
monitors, mediation of cyber-bullying incidents by the Tennant Creek
Council of Elders and Respected Persons, and the creation of Techno
Codey/Culture Codey, an online avatar that explains digital and cultural
issues surrounding cyber-safety.[^201]

The RIPIA *Cyber Safety Program Report*, which also produced three short
film projects and inter-generational artistic activities in response to
cyber-safety issues, observes that: ‘The importance of a family and
community managed response to cyber safety issues, with the assistance
of police, schools and youth workers \[…\] depending on the situation,
indicates further consultation, study and the creation of appropriate
and effective resources.’[^202] This includes improving digital literacy
and training ‘digitally literate mediators \[for\] when cyber safety
concerns arise within remote communities’, because: ‘Developing digital
literacy empowers not only individual users, but extends the capacity of
resolve among members within families and the community who may not be
social networking services users themselves, but who fulfill important
roles as leader and mediators.’[^203]

### Conclusion

Cyber-safety became an issue in the region during the years we visited
the outstations. Developing proficiency in using social media and ICTs
across different age groups is key to empowering remote community
members to manage these issues. At a deeper level, the issue of
cyber-safety demonstrates that platforms such as Facebook and Divas Chat
are significant elements of the media ecology in remote communities, and
are as important as infrastructure. Although corporate platforms can
behave in the public interest, whether and how they are able respond to
the particular dynamics of remote communities when problems arise is a
more complex question, and one that requires further research.[^204]

Overall, the emphasis on personal and family uses of the computers
appears to have developed from the location of the ICTs in the home, in
conjunction with the smallness and remoteness of the communities, the
degree of mobility of some participants, and the relative newness of
ICTs to community members as users. Different community members also
displayed different levels of enthusiasm for the ICTs, and used them to
varying degrees. In a study of older internet users, Selwyn, Gorard and
Furlong found that internet use was generally a means of pursing
existing interests rather than creating new interests: ‘People who were
using the internet on a broad and frequent basis were generally building
upon and extending previously developed interests or using the internet
as part of a repertoire of IT and non IT-based means.’[^205] We observed
a similar trend on the outstations.

More complex and more elaborate uses of the computers would possibly
require significant training and assistance – issues that will be taken
up in Chapter 6. Simple, everyday changes represented by the use of the
home computers for administrative activities indicate, however, the
potential value that internet access represents for smaller settlements,
for example, in connecting to mainstream agencies, in contrast to larger
communities with existing access to on-site services (i.e. at the
community store and Regional Council office). In this way, ICT access
for highly-remote people is particularly significant as governments
shift as much service delivery as possible from ‘over-the-counter’
and/or postal methods to an online-only environment. Without this, there
is a real risk that many remote Aboriginal people will simply ‘drop
offline’ and be further disadvantaged.

<span id="_Toc419811699" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811498" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc318452854" class="anchor"></span></span></span>Chapter 6: Skills and Training
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As early as February 2012, Karen described how she’d helped others in
the community use the computers, especially to access Centrelink
accounts, including her husband and a couple of female relatives,
commenting that it was ‘more me showing them’ than anyone telling her
what to do. She may have been saying this to impress on us how ICT
proficient she’d become; several months later, she was adamant she
hadn’t shown anyone else how to do things on the computer, nor had
anyone else shown her how to do anything. Other community members,
however, reported Karen assisting them in such tasks as using email,
setting a computer password and negotiating Centrelink’s website. On a
later field trip, Karen commented that while ‘everyone has different
bank accounts’, they ‘might use \[her\] computer to check money in their
account’. Another young woman at Mungalawarru also observed that other
people, both men and women, often asked Karen to help them use the
computer, though she herself didn’t ask Karen for help.

But towards the end of the project, Karen seemed to have wearied of this
ad hoc role as the ICT help person for the community. When we asked her
in August 2013 whether she’d been assisting anyone else with Centrelink,
she replied, ‘I don’t really like doing other people’s stuff’. By this
point, as we’ll discuss in Chapter 7, Karen had become more autonomous
in her use of the computer, because she’d moved it into a separate room
mainly for her own use.

Mary, the senior women at Imangara from Chapter 5, played a prominent
role in liaising with us, and in discussions about distribution of ICT
resources within the community. But like most older and some middle-aged
people in the three communities, and also those at Papunya and Ali
Curung, she had no previous ICT skills or experience of computers. On
our first research trip to Imangara, Mary commented that ‘only Andrew’
from the Centre for Appropriate Technology (CAT) had shown her how to do
things on the computer. On subsequent visits, she told us that her
granddaughter, who was in her early 20s, had assisted her. When the
young woman left the community to live in Alice Springs for a while,
Mary said that her grandson was now helping her use Centrelink and
online banking sites. The granddaughter later returned and resumed
living with her grandmother. Her cousin, another young woman living in a
neighbouring house, also named Mary’s granddaughter as the person who’d
taught her how to access YouTube, play games online and print photos.
This granddaughter had a high pre-existing level of ICT proficiency: for
example, she had a Hotmail email address, as well as Twitter and
Facebook accounts, which she accessed on her mobile phone outside the
community before it had internet connectivity. While living in the
community, she sent emails to CAT, asking them to bring replacement inks
and other items on their next visit.

However, we also gained the impression that the granddaughter was
monopolizing use of the computers in two houses, without giving as much
assistance to her grandmother as she could have done, such as showing
her how to use email: Mary continued to request that we help her with
basic administrative activities well into 2013. As with the account of
Karen’s cooling towards her ‘ICT help’ role, this story suggests that
Aboriginal people, even more digitally-proficient community members,
will not necessarily assist each other to use ICTs by sharing skills, or
that younger people will help older ones negotiate online services, for
reasons that we’ll discuss below.

These stories are indicative of digital literacy and skills transfer
trends that emerged during the project. Generally, younger residents
(18-29 years), like Karen at Mungalawarru, and Emily and Mary’s other
granddaughters at Imangara, who had computing experience from school or
elsewhere, were more self-sufficient with using ICTs. They usually only
asked us for specific assistance with problems or complex tasks, which
fell more within the category of technical or application support than
training. When we asked participants whether they thought they were
getting better at using computers, 18-29-year-olds most often
(approximately one-third of self-assessments), said they’d improved
during the project.

In our initial meetings with the three communities, we found that rates
of computer non-adoption were proportionately highest amongst those aged
45-60 years (88 per cent non-adopters), and 60+ years (83 per cent
non-adopters). Physical disability, such as poor eyesight or conditions
such as back or leg problems, compounded their reluctance to use
computers. One woman, for example, complained that a leg injury
prevented her from sitting for any length of time at the computer.

Although elders like Mary often played pivotal roles in discussions
about the project, and in decision-making about distributing ICT
resources, their level of ICT usage tended to be relatively basic, and
they often struggled with learning new skills. Senior women and men
maintained roles in managing ICT resource distribution, which younger
community members respected during meetings (as in the story about Mary
and Emily at Imangara), even when they had plans to make different
arrangements about their computer and internet access. Importantly, we
would not describe Mary as a non-user, as she regularly asked others to
conduct online transactions on her behalf. What has been described as
‘use-by-proxy’ is important, as it demonstrates that even those who do
not have the skills or inclination to use the internet might still be
experiencing its benefits.[^206]

### Schools

Schools are key providers of computers and internet access in remote
Australia; they act as conduits for various ICT programs, and have been
teaching digital literacy skills to children, and sometimes to parents
and teachers’ assistants. Although a full study of ICTs in remote
schools was beyond our means, we called in at schools on a number of
occasions to talk informally with the teachers, and made contact with
the one program that promoted at-home use of devices, One Education (a
spin-off of the international NGO, One Laptop per Child). These
encounters provided us with some insights into schools as sites of
internet access. For example, the Murray Downs school near Imangara was
connected to the internet via satellite.[^207] The school was using both
tablets and desktop computers in the classroom, primarily for
drill-and-practice education applications for mathematics and English.
One teacher mentioned to us that the children were possessive of the
tablets, hiding them in the classroom so they did not have to share with
their peers. All teachers we spoke to considered the children to be fast
learners when it came to the devices, and saw educational value in their
use. Some adults in the community had accessed the internet at the
school prior to our arrival through training organized by a teacher who
had since left the school, and another teacher assisted parents by
purchasing iPads for them when he went to Alice Springs, to save them
from paying higher prices nearby.

Our general impression was that school-based internet and computer use
could vary significantly depending on the teacher. Only 40 per cent of
teachers in very remote schools in the Northern Territory stay teaching
at the same school for more than a year. Such high teacher turnover (see
Brasche and Harrington, 2012, for reasons why this is the case) means
that there is no consistent approach to ICTs. Some teachers had narrow
ideas of what is appropriate use in the classroom environment, and even
teachers who are optimistic about the use of technology for learning, do
not necessarily wish to support activities beyond those which fit within
lesson plans.

Does such a limited experience of ICTs at school impact on attitudes and
use of ICTs later in life? Small remote Indigenous communities have the
(now rare) feature whereby many children are able to access ICTs at
school but not at home. Although we were not able to pursue this
question fully, we did observe that at the start of our project in 2010,
none of those under 30 who had used computers at school had gone on to
purchase a computer for use at home. However, these participants were
certainly more confident users than those without any prior experience
of computers.

In 2012, One Education received \$11.7 million in 2012 to deploy 50,000
bespoke laptops in disadvantaged primary schools across Australia.[^208]
Australian schools that met certain socio-economic criteria – including
serving low-income and remote areas, and the percentage of students that
identified as Indigenous – were eligible for a subsidy (government
derived) that allowed them to access the program and acquire the
hardware for \$100 per laptop. The laptops were also being used by the
Northern Territory Libraries within their Remote Indigenous Public
Internet Access (RIPIA) program.

Our primary interest in the One Education program was that it was
founded on a custodial philosophy, whereby the students own the devices
and use them at home and at school. If students were taking the devices
home, then this would be potentially significant for those communities,
not just the children. The general strategy of putting the devices
directly in the hands of children is thought to ‘compensate for unequal
access to technologies in the home environment and thus help bridge
educational and social gaps’.[^209] A US analysis found that, when
controlling for income, race and parent’s education, those with a home
computer were 6–8 per cent more likely to graduate from high school than
teens who did not have home computer.[^210] However, even within the One
Education program, we found that, in Australia at least, teacher
practices varied widely. Teachers in Indigenous schools were not likely
to allow children to take the One Education devices home, with some
believing the devices would be damaged in over-crowded housing
environments. Some permitted free time on a daily basis, others used
them only for classroom lessons, and a minority of teachers used them as
a reward for good behavior.[^211] Over half the schools reported issues
with connectivity in 2012, finding it difficult to connect the devices
to the education department’s IT system (One Education has since been
working to rectify this). The program’s biggest issue was teacher
turnover: as teachers voluntarily participate in the program, if a
replacement teacher does not wish to participate, the laptops can go
unused. Nonetheless, the program was providing a level of training and a
community of practice for teachers, who overwhelmingly believed that the
devices were good for learning. Schools and one-to-one laptop programs
will remain an important means of ICT skills development in remote
communities.

### Skills Transfer and the Digital Divide

At the project’s outset, we were uncertain how much people would share
the computers or teach each other how to use them. So-called ‘avoidance
relationships’ between the genders and within kinship networks exist
within Aboriginal society, such as it being considered taboo for a
son-in-law to speak with his mother-in-law. There are also continuing
protocols concerning the transfer of knowledge between older and younger
people. Karen’s increasingly personal use of the computer and her
disinclination to help others underlines Chapter 3’s insight that
households, and even individuals, in these remote central Australian
Aboriginal communities can be autonomous. This emphasis on personal and
household ICT use, together with the limited skills-sharing that took
place, have implications for providing training and support, and for
facilitating socially-inclusive ICT arrangements in remote Aboriginal
communities. They also put notions about an ‘Aboriginal preference’ for
group or communal learning to the test.

While several people said during early meetings that children should be
allowed on computers because they can teach others how to use them,
there wasn’t much evidence of inter-generational sharing of ICT skills
on the outstations. The relatively-limited amount of skills transfer
that occurred runs counter to what a popular understanding of the ethos
of Aboriginal culture might suggest: for example, that sharing practices
might automatically foster sharing of ICT resources and skills amongst
participants. It also challenges early assertions by telecommunications
academics and policymakers in mainstream debates that the digital divide
will fix itself as network and equipment costs fall and the internet
becomes more and more a part of daily life.

While we did not seek to provide any accredited form of training, or to
undertake formal assessments, we decided that, when asked, we would help
those who wanted to learn. Training in the use of computer and internet
applications often occurred on an ad hoc basis on house visits while
providing technical support during the CAT team’s regular maintenance
visits, and sometimes on research trips to the communities. Virtually
all of these interactions were face-to-face; very few could have been
carried out using remote communication, given that none of the
households had a fixed landline telephone or mobile phone access.
Residents rarely used email or Skype to ask how to do something or to
solve a problem. On the couple of occasions when this happened, the
issue almost always required personal follow-up during a community
visit.

Community members who maintained an interest in the computers were often
those who already had a degree of digital literacy and were more likely
to seek help. Some improvements in participants’ skill levels were
evident during the project. For example, when we asked them six months
into the trial whether they had gotten better at using the computer,
two-thirds replied positively, listing new or improved skills related to
using email; on-line banking; typing; word processing; folder and
desktop management; writing letters, stories and songs; use of
spreadsheets; downloading material (movies, music and games); Facebook;
and viewing photographs and other pictures.

But a year into the project, it became apparent that without further
digital education and skills development of some kind, other remote
community members, especially older ones, were likely to find dealing
with services, such as banks and government agencies that increasingly
rely on internet interfaces, particularly challenging. Consequently, we
devoted more attention in the second half of 2012 to investigating what
training approaches might provide the most benefits for remote
Aboriginal residents, especially given their range of ICT skills and the
particular social practices and protocols operating within these
communities.

### Developing an ICT Training Approach for Remote Aboriginal People

Research during the 1980s and 1990s into Aboriginal adult education and
training suggested that Aboriginal people were more comfortable learning
in groups than individually.[^212] But when we asked residents how they
liked to receive training about computers and internet use, most (88 per
cent) said they preferred to learn individually or as a couple/pair.
Without exception, all of them wanted to learn on their own computers,
preferably in their own homes (or Community Development Employment
Projects \[CDEP\] shed or Women’s Centre for those who were using shared
desktop computers), rather than group training in a shared space in the
community or the nearest town.

This response is consistent with Battiste’s model, which proposes that
Indigenous people prefer independent learning and individual
instruction, along with some common characteristics referred to within
other research, such as direct learning by seeing and doing,
observation, experiential learning, and applying knowledge to real
circumstances.[^213] More recent research has sought to construct a
framework that accommodates both independent learning orientations in
Aboriginal students and the importance of community links emphasizing
the group.[^214] Furthermore, a large body of research indicates that
active involvement by adult learners in the design of a learning program
is more likely to result in their engagement with, and support for, the
program; this is particularly true of Aboriginal learners, where a
two-way or multiple-way system that allows for Aboriginal ownership and
cross-cultural understanding is crucial to success.[^215]

To investigate this further, we discussed with community members, either
individually or with their partner or a close relative, matters such as
where they preferred to receive training, at what times, whether in
groups or one-on-one, what encouraged them to learn, what they were
interested in learning to do, and what they already felt confident doing
on the computers and internet. We also asked whether they had any
specific physical needs, such as glasses or hearing aids, and tried to
assess how avoidance relationships might affect training situations. At
the time, almost 60 per cent of the residents were available, a
situation that was not unusual given that numbers of community members
present on field trips varied throughout the project. Those who took
part in discussing these training issues were broadly representative of
participants, possessing a range of literacy and numeracy skills, and
including young men and women aged in their 20s and 30s, as well as
older women in their 40s, 50s and 60s.

Aside from requesting training individually or in a pair, and in their
own homes, they also unanimously opted for training during each monthly
visit, mostly for ‘a little bit’ or ‘a bit’ of time, although some
suggested times from thirty minutes up to half a day. Familiarity with
the surroundings, equipment and people appeared to be important,
combined with the ease of not having to travel to town, which involves
additional costs, as well as organizing transport and accommodation.
Research conducted elsewhere in central Australia also indicates a
preference for in-community learning rather than at an external
location.[^216] Learning individually affords privacy, allows learners
to focus on their own interests, and provides an atmosphere where
they’re likely to feel more at ease, more comfortable in asking
questions, and away from situations in which they might potentially feel
embarrassment (shame) at not understanding instructions or knowing how
to do something.[^217]

Residents identified various tasks they wanted to learn, ranging from
using email; on-line banking; downloading movies and music; uploading
photographs; touch typing; customizing the Windows display; writing
stories; using Facebook and Skype; shopping on-line; taking an on-line
language course; using Excel; on-line training in literacy and numeracy
for both adults and children; making signs, posters and notices;
checking weather reports; and internet browsing. Several people named
the same tasks as activities that they already felt confident doing,
perhaps indicating that they wished to become more proficient at that
task, or that they wished to learn additional or more complex tasks
within an application. Community members did not always say explicitly
why they wanted to learn different activities, although some said they
wanted to ‘get better’ at a certain task, to enhance their existing
employment skills, or to contact Centrelink more easily.

Using desktop computers as the focus and the tool for ICT training may
also have been more suited to individual rather than group learning.
Other researchers have observed that computers themselves fit readily
with Aboriginal educational styles because they are interactive, involve
learning by doing, and permit trial and error. They also allow people to
progress at their own pace, and are real-time oriented as well as being
‘endlessly patient, repetitive’.[^218]

We also asked about their preferred group composition (age and gender)
for training, and whether there were any cultural relationships that
might preclude anyone from being in the same room as someone else.
No-one expressed any particular preferences about age or gender, apart
from one elderly woman who said she’d rather learn with women only.
Similarly, only one person, again an older woman, identified cultural
avoidance of individuals either from within their community or from
another community as a potential issue. Her response, that she could not
be in the same room as anyone from another community, concurred with
anecdotal evidence suggesting that, in remote central Australian
communities, the older generations (elders) continue to uphold
traditional cultural practices in relation to interpersonal
relationships. None of the younger community members identified
avoidance relationships as an issue, which is in keeping with
observations that younger generations sometimes place less emphasis on
maintaining these traditions.

No-one requested an interpreter to explain things in language, which was
not surprising given that all the computer applications are in English.
Eady and Woodcock have also noted that many Indigenous learners prefer
to receive instruction in English in order to improve their language,
literacy and numeracy skills to be able to interact more effectively
with Western society or ‘whitefellas’.[^219]

### An Individual, Opportunistic Approach to Learning

The findings from the discussions we had with community members about
learning preferences suggested that it might be appropriate to
reconsider some of the commonly-held notions about adult Aboriginal
people preferring to learn in groups, particularly in regard to ICT
training. This confirmed the ad hoc approach to learning that had
already emerged in the project, in which we often spent time with
individuals and one or two other family members in their homes,
responding to their requests for training and technical support on the
computer. During the remainder of the project, we tried to fine-tune
this approach, which could best be described as opportunistic and
flexible, by providing training tailored to individual adult community
members’ needs, aspirations and preferences.

Given that the timing, content and location are all largely determined
by the learner, the main challenge for the trainer in this approach lies
in attempting to predict how much time, individually and collectively,
the learning will take.[^220] Consequently, the CAT team set aside
additional time for training during their technical support trips. In
practice, about 70 per cent of their time was spent on providing
technical support, and 30 per cent on training during each visit. An
average of four learning opportunities per visit to each community
occurred, varying from none – for example when participants were absent
or researchers’ time was taken up entirely with managing technical
incidents – to sixteen. The CAT team also occasionally received and
responded to support requests from community members by email or phone
between visits.

Learners largely determined the session’s length, although it was
impacted to a lesser extent by competing demands on our time. Sessions
ranged from short-task specific learning opportunities of ten to twenty
minutes to intensive three-hourly sessions in which community members
participated in a range of activities. Almost three-quarters of the
learning opportunities occurred as one-on-one sessions between the
learner and the researcher, 20 per cent in pairs and 9 per cent in
groups, reflecting participants’ preferred learning modes.

In most (71 per cent) of these sessions, participants determined what
they wished to learn, usually by asking us a question such as: ‘Could
you show me how to \[undertake a certain activity\]?’ We demonstrated
how to do that particular task several times, and then asked the
participant to repeat it until they felt confident. Overall, most of the
learning opportunities and participants’ training revolved around using
the internet, despite us urging them to learn maintenance (see Appendix
3, Figure 6). However, on occasions, learning also occurred when
researchers were occupied with providing technical support rather than
training: community members learned computer maintenance tasks mainly by
watching us change ink cartridges, clear ink nozzles, and other
trouble-shooting activities associated with printers and, to a lesser
extent, the computers themselves. Occasionally, we suggested certain
tasks we felt participants might be interested in learning, or that they
would need to know before the move to self-funded internet plans (see
Appendix 3, Figure 5).

Early in the project, usage of the computers and the internet focused
mainly on online banking, downloading music and printing photographs.
Later, some community members began to ask more complex queries such as
how to access internet on ICT devices: for example, there were several
requests at Imangara during 2013 for WiFi in order to allow their
children to access the internet via iPads.

Other household members and friends were often present, watching and
listening, if not otherwise actively participating in one-on-one
sessions. Some group discussions took place within community meetings
where we discussed administrative matters such as how quotas work, the
shift to individual satellite services and billing accounts, and so on.
These provided a forum in which common issues could be raised, and
information, including hand-outs, was passed on to all residents at the
same time.

### Experiences with Group Training Approaches

Towards the end of the trial, we attempted to organize group training
for some community members at Imangara who wanted to try this style of
learning, and for researchers to compare the individual and group
experiences. The proposed activity was a one-day Digital Stories
workshop to be delivered by a multi-media trainer from Barkly Arts in a
meeting room at Ali Curung, 30 kilometers away. But when a couple of our
researchers arrived in Imangara the day before the workshop to remind
community members that it was happening (they had sent email messages
beforehand), the place was a ghost town. Only one older woman appeared
to be there, sitting on her verandah. She told us that the others were
‘all gone’: some to Tennant Creek for a royalty meeting; the others,
including Mary, for a funeral and a sing-a-long at Lake Nash. She had
wanted to go with them, but they left without her. She told us they
might be back ‘tonight \[Tuesday\] or tomorrow’.

Driving towards Imangara the next morning, we met a car of people from
Ali Curung, who told us that everyone was going on to Mount Isa now for
a rodeo, and that no-one would be back until Monday at the earliest. A
little later, we saw a couple of people on the road who turned out to be
Mary’s relatives. We offered them a ride and they asked us to go back up
the road to get another couple. The four of them had been at the
roadhouse bar at Wauchope the night before, but their car had broken
down and they’d slept inside with no blankets, which was apparently very
cold. When we found them, the couple asked to be dropped in Ali Curung
so they could arrange to get the car.

The couple arrived back at Imangara after lunch and retreated into their
house, as did Mary’s other relatives. We didn’t see them for the rest of
the day; they’d probably all gone to sleep, although someone told us the
granddaughter was on the computer. By this time, we’d cancelled the
workshop that was scheduled for the afternoon. A couple of other
middle-aged women were in the community, and we later ran into them at
the Murray Downs shop. The senior man and the young people arrived back
in Imangara the following day.

Two middle-aged women said they’d like to do the Digital Stories
training sometime, whereas none of the young people showed any interest.
This confirmed our existing impression that there was more interest in
ICT learning amongst the middle-aged members of the community than for
the young ones, who were already somewhat proficient from having used
computers at school.

Overall, this experience indicated that structured training was
impractical and not at all efficient in a community of this size.
Structured group training is probably more suited to larger communities
with a youth or media center and ongoing engagement from youth workers
and cultural workers, and as part of a continuing experience of
training/activity.

The experience taught us that training needs to be flexible to cater for
high levels of mobility and uncertainty. The unpredictable rhythms of
people’s lives, as well as the more ‘everyday’, household focus on
computer use, made it feel artificial to impose structured training on
community members at Imangara. By the time we offered group training,
the novelty value of computers and trying to do new things on them had
also worn off, although the computers had by then become a valued as
part of household infrastructure that people seemed to want to maintain.

### Conclusion

In remote Indigenous communities, age and gender differentials impact on
learning opportunities, as do relationships between family groups. We
found that individual learning within private households in a way that
was responsive to the participant’s needs and requests for training was
the most equitable and inclusive approach. People were also more likely
to be interested in uses of the internet that brought small but
noticeable benefits to their everyday lives.

Our experience was thus contrary to the commonly-held notion that
Aboriginal people like to learn in groups, at least when it comes to
computers and associated software. That the subject matter (computers)
was the same as the learning mechanism, and that it was delivered in an
informal home environment, goes only partway towards explaining the
preference for individual learning. The emphasis on everyday uses of the
computers and internet within a domestic setting, combined with the
trend towards discrete family and household ownership and use of the
computers, probably strongly influenced the desire for individual
learning within these small communities.

There are clear implications for the delivery of ICT-related training in
remote Aboriginal communities, particularly as take-up of
individually-owned devices such as laptops and iPads is likely to
continue.[^221] Although logistically challenging and resource
intensive, a flexible, opportunistic approach that tailors learning
opportunities to the individual’s needs and takes place within private,
safe spaces rather than as formal, structured training can be effective
(although we discuss in Chapter 8 how a different approach can work
where there is a long-term shared computer facility). Without more
exposure to the capabilities of information and communication
technology, including digital education and skills development, remote
community members, especially older ones, may fail to grasp its
benefits.

<span id="_Toc419811700" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811499" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811701" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811500" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc318452855" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span></span>Chapter 7: Gender
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The overall trend in survey-based studies of internet adoption and use
is that men, especially younger ones, tend to be early adopters of
internet technology and are more strongly represented in ICT usage: boys
are ‘generally quicker than girls to lay claim to cyberspace and digital
media’.[^222] The World Internet Project found in 2007 that in ‘all
twelve WIP countries assessed for this study, men use the Internet
somewhat more than women’, although over time, ‘a slow diminishing of
the gender divides’ occurs as women’s participation generally slightly
increases while men’s slightly decreases.[^223] Some feminist
researchers have described a ‘gender digital divide’, and the
male-coding of the information and communications sector.[^224] For the
three outstations, having desktop computers in the home thus seemed a
scenario that might stereotypically appeal to young men.[^225] However,
we found that this was not necessarily the case. Women appeared to be
the dominant users of the computers and internet at home, while men were
frequent users of shared computer facilities.

There is considerable discussion within the anthropological literature
about the gendering of activities and domains within traditional
Aboriginal societies in terms of separate spheres with complementary
functional roles.[^226] In her landmark review, ‘Gender and Aboriginal
society’, anthropologist Francesca Merlan observes how remote northern
Australian Indigenous social contexts are characterized by ‘the
frequently found Aboriginal tendency toward dualism—insistence
ideologically and practically upon some degree of male-female
separatism’.[^227] Anthropologists and others have described the
gendering of activities and domains within traditional Aboriginal
societies in terms of separate spheres with complementary functional
roles, with perspectives differing as to whether gender inequalities are
inherent within this schema or whether they result from, or are
exacerbated by, the imposition of European culture.[^228] Some (such as
Cowlishaw and Hamilton) claim that women occupy a subordinate role
within this schema, while others (such as Bell and Kaberry) argue that
Aboriginal women exercise and enjoy a degree of autonomy in traditional
society.[^229]

Merlan urges caution, however, in invoking the notion of autonomy in
relation to the gendering of activities and domains, because of its
different conceptualization within Aboriginal and European frameworks.
She states that Aboriginal selfhood ‘is importantly constituted through
social relatedness, and thus is not to be confused with western notions
of individualism’.[^230] She also draws on Annette Hamilton’s discussion
of how gender autonomy might be confused with labor and cultural
division within Aboriginal social life because men’s and women’s lives
appear to be self-contained.[^231]

As feminist scholar McClintock has said, ‘domesticity is both a *space*
and a *relationship of power*’.[^232] The impact of the gender division
of labor within domestic space in central Australian remote Aboriginal
communities is thus worth considering in relation to ICT infrastructures
and programs.

### Women’s Internet Use

When we commenced, Karen’s husband had a laptop, which he had borrowed
from a relative. The laptop had been purchased in another state, and he
believed the WiFi only connected to the internet there. Karen did not
use the laptop. Not long after the communities received computers and
internet access, some women began to play a key role in using the
computers for household purposes. As discussed in Chapter 5 (Uses),
Karen described managing her family’s administration by accessing
Centrelink every day, paying bills and trying to teach her husband how
to pay his Austar account online. Her husband, on the other hand,
reported using the computer for work purposes to check emails from his
employer on the cattle project. In 2012, Karen said they were equally
responsible for the computer, but by 2013, she reported that keeping it
safe was, ‘a bit of \[him\], most of me; if I’m not around, he makes
sure it’s closed. Yeah, and kids aren’t on it. If something
happens—maybe \[the kids\] throwing the mouse around—he tells me’. She
now used the computer the most, whereas he was ‘always busy on his
playstation’. They swapped if they got bored, and, ‘If there’s something
on my computer he wants, he grabs it, puts it on a USB stick, then onto
his playstation’.

Later when Karen took us to see the computer on the same visit, her
husband was sleeping face down on a foam mattress in their living room,
exhausted from the day’s mustering. Karen led us into the spare bedroom
where the computer was kept: there was almost nothing inside apart from
the computer in its box on a desk. Karen and her husband were like a
couple with their own toys, with him on the playstation in the main room
and her on the computer in its separate room. Although she said the kids
used the computer as well, the pride with which Karen maintained the
room suggested that it was her personal space.

In the same community, another woman soon assumed responsibility for her
household’s computing activities, commenting that while her husband only
used the computer for playing card games, he often requested that she
perform administrative tasks for him, such as sending emails on his
behalf to staff at the Central Land Council (CLC) and the cattle
project. When we asked him why he wasn’t using the computer so much, he
claimed that he didn’t know how, and that he was too busy to learn,
although he wouldn’t mind being able to manage information about the
cattle project, such as mustering details, prices and sales, on the
computer. Several months later, he had still not made any progress in
learning how to use the computer, and was instructing his wife to write
reports for the cattle project. Cynthia said: ‘He tells me what to
write, and I write and print it out. I check incoming email every
morning.’ She also printed out emails for another male relative.

At Kwale Kwale in February 2012, Rhonda, the tertiary-educated
middle-aged woman who worked part-time in Alice Springs, told us that
she wanted to teach her husband to use the computer, but he was ‘too
frightened to go near it’. She was also hoping to set up Skype so he
could talk to his daughters, who lived away from the community. Rhonda
said she wanted to learn how to access internet banking, shopping and
Centrelink so she could teach others in the community how to use them,
along with Skype and making Microsoft word documents. In Chapter 5, we
discussed how she had planned to use word processing programs on the
computer to make multi-lingual books about bush tucker with another
community member. She had also thought she might order groceries online
from supermarkets in Alice Springs, which she could sell, along with
home-grown vegetables, at a stall in the community. She reported using
the computer mostly to contact friends by email as well as doing
contract work; another community member described Rhonda using her home
computer as her ‘office’.

As these stories suggest, certain young and middle-aged women came to
play a key role in taking responsibility for the computers within
individual households, often using them for administrative purposes,
sometimes on behalf of other family members. The computers became a
domestic hub of sorts, an extension of everyday practices associated
with a more female-oriented sphere, including banking, online shopping
and child-related educational activities. While community members all
mentioned using the computers for personal entertainment and
administration, women more often listed accessing Centrelink and
internet banking than men in their top five activities on the computer
(see Appendix 3, Figure 3A). They also described shopping online for
items such as car parts, cars, garden stuff, music CDs, plates, forks,
iPads, kids’ games, bibles, bible tapes, Christian books and a laptop.
Men mainly reported using the computers to play games or to watch movies
(see Appendix 3, Figure 3B), and often seemed happy to allow women to
manage household finances online as well as contacting local
organizations on their behalf.

Community members identified women, followed by children, as the
computer’s most frequent users, with women making up two-thirds of those
aged 18-29 years (see Appendix 3, Figure 2). When we asked participants
to assess their level of computer skills, women (roughly one-third) and
18-29 year olds (again, approximately one-third) gave the most positive
self-assessments of their computer skills, which supports the
observation that women, especially the younger ones, had developed
greater digital literacy skills during the project. These trends
correlate with those from our original survey of community members’
computer experience of skills prior to installation, which found a
greater proportion of women (52 per cent) had some ICT proficiency in
contrast to men (29 per cent).

We observed that women were more likely to tell us about their social
media use. A report by Remote Indigenous Public Internet Access (RIPIA)
found that women made up most of the social media users on the three
platforms used by remote community members: 59 per cent of Facebook
users and 65 per cent of Divas Chat and airG users.[^233] When the RIPIA
researcher asked community members at Papunya whether they thought
people understood how to manage their privacy settings on social media
accounts, they responded informally ‘that females understood, but males
did not’, a response that was supported by survey data indicating ‘that
females comprised 89 per cent of the “yes” response’ in this
community.[^234] The RIPIA researcher suggested that being able to
manage privacy settings indicated ‘that individuals who spend more time
engaging with digital devices and social networking services, in this
case being females \[…\] are able to develop higher levels of digital
literacy’. [^235]

Participants at Imangara often mentioned children as computer users (45
per cent of responses). This was probably because of the greater numbers
of children there than in Mungalawarru who were able to stay in the
community while attending the nearby local infants and primary
school.[^236] The high rates of young women and children reported using
the computers tends to support the ‘domestic hub’ emphasis of use of the
computers. As discussed in the previous chapter, although senior women
over 60 years of age at Imangara and Mungalawarru often acted in a
‘figurehead’ capacity, liaising with researchers and in resource
distribution at community meetings, their actual ICT usage was fairly
limited (see ‘Digital literacy in Chapter 6).

When we asked who in the household looked after the computer during the
project, individual women were most often mentioned as being chiefly
responsible (around 60 per cent at both Imangara and Mungalawarru); that
is, rather than individual men, couples (‘we both do’) or households
(‘all of us’). Once again, youth was a significant factor, again
suggesting a correlation between this role and higher levels of digital
literacy: mainly women (86 per cent) aged 18-29 years at Imangara and
only women and men in their 20s and 30s at Mungalawarru were named as
responsible for the computers.

Overall, these results reflect a higher rate of engagement with the ICTs
amongst young women, in using and taking responsibility for the
computers, as well as being willing informants (see Appendix 3, Figures
7 and 8).

### Men’s Internet Use

One young man in his early 20s stayed at Mungalawarru for about 12-18
months, sharing a computer with four other young adults and a child in a
mutual living space at a house transitory community members tended to
occupy. When we first met him in July 2012, he reported using the
computer for fairly basic purposes – to check emails, to browse the
internet and to download music – but said that he ‘wouldn’t pay to keep
it; I don’t use it enough’. He also mentioned the role that young women
played in assisting him to use the computer, saying that he’d been
watching others print out letters and photos, and access Centrelink
online, which he wanted to learn how to do himself. However, he
identified the main obstacle to him in using the computer as being that
‘sometimes others using it stops me from using it’.

Four months later, he said that two young women used the computer most
in his house, one of whom he identified as being the person who looked
after the computer. While he thought he was using the computer the ‘same
amount’ as before, he said that he had improved ‘by looking at other
people using it’, citing checking BasicsCard balances as something he
had learned in this way. He named Karen first as someone who had shown
him new activities, then Andrew, who ‘showed him little bit email’.
Karen, who was listening in on the conversation, remarked that the young
man ‘tells me if I have an important one’. The young man was more
positive about the value of ICT access since we’d last spoken to him,
saying he thought the computers had been ‘great – awesome, eh’ for the
community, because people could ‘download music, videos; look at
entertainment’. As a result, he ‘stay\[ed\] in Mungalawarru more. At
town, \[you\] do nothing’. He also said he would be happy to pay \$30
per month for an internet plan.

This man’s story, as someone who was initially disinterested in ICTs
until he saw their benefits, demonstrates how community members with
lower degrees of digital literacy may engage more with ICTs if they’re
exposed to their use. A year or so after we first met him, however, he
had left Mungalawarru, which, as we discussed in Chapter 4, was not an
uncommon pattern amongst young men in remote communities, who are more
likely than young women to need to travel to find work. There are also
cultural precedents for young men to live a transitory lifestyle; Myers
describes how until they have married (often in middle age amongst the
Pintupi) and have passed through further stages of instruction conducted
by older men, ‘young men cannot settle down, cannot stay in one
place’.[^237] Traditionally, young unmarried men post-initiation were:
‘free and unfettered \[…\] not yet channeled into reproduction but under
the guidance of larger society as embodied by older men’. [^238]

The man’s story indicates how transitory some remote community members’
lifestyles can be, particularly young males, with the result that their
exposure to ICTs may be limited and their level of digital proficiency
lower than that of less-mobile community members. By contrast, the young
women he knew, who frequently displayed high levels of computer skills,
were often less mobile, and more likely to be found in the community
when we visited.

Four men were in prison for periods ranging from six to twelve months
during the first two years after the computers were installed, and thus
had fewer opportunities to ask questions and learn basic skills from us.
At Mungalawarru, men were often involved in a local cattle project and
hunting, which meant they weren’t always present when we were visiting,
or that they returned in the late afternoon just as we were leaving the
community. In households where participants reported men using the
computers for entertainment and administrative purposes, they often came
to rely on, or to expect that women, especially female partners, would
perform administrative tasks for them on the computers, even within a
few months after installation.

Research by the Desert Knowledge CRC corroborates the notion of dual
systems in relation to technical functions undertaken within remote
community life, which tend to be divided along gender lines, but with
some tasks shared by both sexes. In their 2008 paper, ‘Housing for
livelihoods: The lifecycle of housing and infrastructure through a
whole-of-system approach in remote Aboriginal settlements’, researchers
Seeman, Parnell, McFallan and Tucker identify a series of activities
(see Figure 4 in Appendix 3) as being predominantly women’s technical
functions, some – such as washing and repairing clothes – of which
relate directly to the domestic sphere, while others—teaching and
education, health, administration, arts and crafts—are less strongly
linked, possibly because they have been introduced through Western
contact.[^239] Tasks relating to an external domain of outdoor
activities were coded as predominantly men’s technical functions, with a
‘middle ground’ of tasks perceived as gender neutral or equally shared
by the sexes.

Seemann and his fellow researchers also observed the impact of
government and private technical support funding cycles on gender
employment issues in remote communities: ‘men’s work, seen mostly in the
technical fields, was sporadic or opportunist; women’s work, seen mostly
in the educational and health fields, was steady, institutional,
developmental and programmed’.[^240] They noted that there was an
increased emphasis on providing training for ‘\[s\]emi-technical and
non-industrial occupational skills, such as settlement health and
primary school teacher assistant skills’ which tends to emphasize
organizational and cross-communicational competencies, and attracted
more Aboriginal women than men as participants.[^241] There was less
funding available for training and skills development for ‘specialist
trade or industrial technology occupations’ associated with men, and
‘this had more of a social effect on the skills development and
educational participation rate for Aboriginal men than for Aboriginal
women, particularly for small settlement populations’.[^242] As well as
the cultural precedent for higher levels of mobility amongst young men,
the lack of employment and training opportunities connected with
male-associated technical functions may partly explain their infrequent
presence at the computers. In addition to the domestic location of the
desktop computers, participants may also have perceived the ICT skills
and training opportunities (discussed in Chapter 3) we offered during
the project to be more aligned with women’s technical functions and
typical occupations. For example, one husband’s comments (above) about
wanting his wife to write administrative reports for him about the
cattle project suggests that he may have seen this ‘home office’ use of
the computer as more part of her domain of technical activity, but
complementary to his cattle work within a male domain of external
activity. Merlan observes that: ‘Women’s productive and especially
redistributive role was important in defining Aboriginal domesticity,
and the current membership of particular domestic groups.’[^243] Women’s
greater participation in the project – looking after the computers,
doing tasks online for family and liaising with researchers – may
reflect the correlation of the computers with the more female-oriented
domain of the household as an extension of the women’s technical and
reproductive role in Aboriginal society.

### Difficulties in Observing Gender Dynamics

There was a gradual attrition of male community members from interview
sessions and training. Even in the initial stages, men made up slightly
less than half (45 per cent) of the participants in community meetings
about the computers. At the time, we observed that young men in
particular were often out at work or in town, and therefore more
difficult to interview.[^244] A couple of years after we installed the
computers in the communities, men’s rate of participation in surveys and
discussions on our research trips had declined to just under one-third
(29 per cent). With only a few exceptions, when men interacted with us,
it was often as a member of a couple or a family group, and they were
generally less forthcoming than the women present. The women
occasionally mentioned some young men – brothers, nephews, grandsons –
using the computers, with a couple of women in their 20s once reporting
that their 16-year-old nephew had shown them how to do things on the
computer. When we asked Mary on one occasion whether the ‘young fellas
use the computers’, she replied, ‘Yeah, they use them. They help me use
the computers’, which may suggest that young men used the ICTs and
helped others with them more than was evident when we were in the
communities.

Women’s greater rate of participation (71 per cent) was likely to have
been influenced by the fact that we were a majority of women, and
interacting with us was therefore possibly considered the responsibility
of the women. The greater numbers of women mentioned as frequent
computer users may also reflect gender peer group dynamics: that is, not
only did more women participate in the field research, but they tended
to cite themselves and their female contemporaries more often as users
(as in the responses to the question in the previous section about who
looked after the computer, where each gender tended to report use by its
members more often). Therefore, although our interactions with the
outstation residents suggested a gender-coding of spaces, roles and
activities associated with computer use, we do not consider these to be
conclusive results.

### Gender Access at a Shared Facility

As discussed in the next chapter, we visited Papunya in May 2012 to
examine the Papunya Internet and Community Room (PCR) as an example of
ICT usage at a shared facility in a large remote community. During this
trip, we spoke to a sample of community members about their use of
computers and the internet, not all of whom were regular computer room
users. We found that young men rather than young women were the dominant
users.

Most of the women we spoke to in the community considered the PCR to be
specifically associated with young men, and said they did not feel
comfortable there because of the cultural protocols about the need for
men and women to maintain separate spaces. Middle-aged and older people
of both sexes at Papunya also expressed the view that the computer room
was for young people, or they could not use computers because they had
not received computer training at school.

There were often only a handful of women using the facility when we
visited, whereas the main computer room was usually full of young men
and sometimes kids. Young men’s greater use of the PCR relates in part
to its original purpose as a diversionary outlet: it was established in
early 2009 after the second visit to the community by the Senate Inquiry
into Petrol Sniffing, to provide an alternative source of educational
and creative industry activities for young people, especially males aged
14-25 years, who had missed out on primary education because of
substance misuse. It also has overlaps with creative industry activities
at the Warumpi studio, catering particularly to young men’s interests in
making and listening to music (see Chapter 8).

The higher rate of male users we observed in May 2012 was also at odds
with results from a survey of the Papunya Computer room that the Central
Australian Youth Link Up Service (CAYLUS) conducted in 2010, when usage
according to gender was in the order of 44 per cent females and 56 per
cent males.[^245] Within the following years, the computer room appears
to have become identified as a distinctly young male space. Similarly,
when we conducted research into internet use at Ali Curung, we were told
that young males tended to dominate the computer room when it was open;
young women only used it when a youth worker provided specific programs
and activities for them.

### The Kungkas’ Room and Equity of Gender Access at the PCR

In early 2012, CAYLUS, in conjunction with the Papunya community, set up
a Kungkas’ (or women’s) room alongside the main computer room in
response to the perception that the PCR was largely a young male space.
The Kungkas’ room, a ‘lounge’-style space with books and toys, where
mothers could bring children while they used the computers, was intended
to provide a location where women would feel comfortable about accessing
the computers, as well as addressing the overflow of users from the main
room. A female community development worker was engaged to undertake
self-directed learning with young women in the Kungkas’ room.

At the time of our visit to Papunya in May 2012, the Kunkgas’ room had
only been open for several months, and there weren’t any significant
increases in female computer users. It did not appear to have gained
sufficient momentum yet to change perceptions about who felt comfortable
using the computer facility. Some female non-users in the community,
most of whom were middle-aged or older, told us they were unaware of the
Kungkas’ room’s existence, which suggests the computing facility
continued to be associated more with youth activities.

When we spoke to CAYLUS a year later, they reported that while there
were approximately seventy users per day at the Papunya Computer Room,
use of the Kungkas' room tended to wax and wane, often according to
whether female support workers were present. They also said that some
boys had been entering the Kungkas' room and ‘getting flirty’ with the
girls, but that local Papunya female staff members were unable to get
the boys to leave, because of inter-family relationships. PCR and CAYLUS
staff also observed that certain family relationships, as well as age
and gender groups, could influence who felt comfortable using the
computer room, similar to how access to the Women’s Centre computers at
Imangara became largely restricted to one family. CAYLUS suggested that
some white support staff would probably always be involved in managing
the computer room, because of the need to take into account cultural
constraints relating to gender and family affiliations.[^246]

In September 2013, the PCR underwent a further evolution when it was
re-located in the Maku Shed (further discussed in Chapter 9,
‘Alternative Regimes’). Originally, a small room in the Maku Shed was
set aside for Kungkas only, but it proved difficult for the coordinator
to supervise along with the main room, and was closed after two of its
computer screens were damaged. The coordinator did not think, however,
that gender was as significant an issue in the Maku Shed as in the
original PCR building, because it was a larger space and harder for the
men to dominate, although she thought that avoidance relationships still
needed to be managed.

The Papunya experience indicates that one drawback of a shared facility
arrangement such as a computer center or kiosk is its capacity to be
patronized by a particular group to the exclusion of other sections of
the local community. In the case of the original PCR, the greater
presence of young men in the main room discouraged other groups, such as
women and older people, from using the computers. Consequently, cultural
constraints relating to gender and family affiliations, whereby members
of the opposite sex and certain family groupings cannot occupy the same
space, shaped the planning of successive versions of the computer room,
particularly in regard to space and staffing arrangements.

### Conclusion

Contrary to the expectations of international literature, and the
experience of shared facilities at Papunya and Ali Curung, women engaged
more substantially in ICT use in the outstations. This outcome suggests
household-based ICT arrangements might preference women as users, given
their associations with domestic space and administrative tasks
(although this evidence was perhaps distorted by the majority female
composition of our research team). It raises the possibility, however,
that locating computers and internet access within household space might
lead to stronger association of digital technology with a female-coded
domain and technical activities, with positive flow-on effects in
facilitating greater ICT usage by women and children. This is a
significant benefit of providing ICT access on a household basis,
extending women’s educational and creative opportunities, as well as
assisting with the practical aspects of their lives. Overall, the
unintentional age and gender biases associated with the location of
computers and internet access in both the outstation trial and the PCR
indicate the need to consider Aboriginal cultural norms and behavior in
regard to gender, age and avoidance relationships in providing ICT
infrastructure and arrangements, as well as training and technical
support, to facilitate equality of access in remote Aboriginal
communities.

PART III
========

Chapter 8: Alternative Regimes
------------------------------

The outstation residents’ encounters with satellite internet, as
recounted in previous chapters, was aided and shaped by our efforts.
Assistance with software downloads and passwords, the cables, ink and
spare parts we provided, our dealings with installers, and a myriad of
other small tasks, impacted on the residents’ experience of the
internet. The Home Internet Project thus involved what can be considered
a unique ‘terms of use’ – albeit a consultative one – in that those who
took part knowingly agreed to our involvement, and were given a set of
choices and a level of guidance. In the process we observed, and were
brought into, the social dimensions of computing and internet use that
emerged.

The question that arises is the extent to which different arrangements
for technology, provisioning and support might have resulted in a
different level of engagement or experience of the internet. As
mentioned in Chapter 1, a number of programs attempting to deliver
internet access have been implemented in remote communities since the
1990s. These have produced highly-varied levels of infrastructure,
facilities and technological approaches across different communities. A
small number of larger communities have also received the kinds of
infrastructure and telecommunication services widely available in
metropolitan and regional areas, such as mobile broadband and ADSL. In
this chapter, we discuss the resulting patchwork of internet access, and
discuss the pros and cons of the various models.

We also examine how each of these arrangements impacts on issues of
affordability, the different retail mechanisms they offer (where
relevant), and the ongoing costs of maintaining networks and equipment.
As shown in Part II, the spatial and social dimensions of internet
access change according to whether the internet is accessed in public or
domestic spaces, and whether these arrangements favor certain groups of
users, or encourage use of a particular type of device. Some of the
programs that have been implemented in remote communities provide free
access, whereas others involve particular retail mechanisms (explored
further in Chapter 9). An important issue is the sustainability of these
various regimes, and whether they encourage reliance on outside agencies
and providers through subsidies and maintenance arrangements, or rely
primarily on commercial providers.

In this chapter, we focus on two larger communities, one of which has a
large shared internet access facility and did not receive mobile
coverage until mid 2014 (Papunya, as introduced in the previous
chapter), and another which has had mobile broadband for some years (Ali
Curung). As we were not able to spend the same level of time engaging
with the residents in these larger communities, our account is
exploratory rather than being a full comparison with the satellite
experience on the outstations. From interviews with residents and others
connected to the communities, we were able to understand the various
conveniences and difficulties that those living in the two larger
communities experienced in accessing the internet, and what they were
using the internet for.

During the course of our research, information about various other
infrastructures, trials and projects emerged, including WiFi hotspots in
communities with satellite pay phones initiated by the Department of
Broadband, Communication and the Digital Economy (now the Department of
Communication). In the final part of the chapter, we consider
international models and discuss why they may or may not eventuate in
remote Australia.

### The Papunya Internet and Computer Room

As mentioned in the previous chapter, the Papunya Computer Room (PCR)
was established in early 2009 to provide alternative educative and
diversionary activities for young people in the community, especially
males aged 14-25 years who had been identified by the Senate Inquiry
into Petrol Sniffing.[^247] We followed the evolution of the PCR from
2010-2014. Even within this relatively short timeframe, the PCR
underwent a series of significant transitions in adapting to available
ICT, including the introduction of mobile coverage, and in attempting to
meet the needs of the community. Those engaged in the development of the
computer room at the Papunya community grappled with how to facilitate
equitable ICT access for local community members in view of social
inclusiveness, available forms of connectivity and ICT equipment,
technical and training support, ongoing costs and long-term
sustainability.

When we visited in 2012, the PCR comprised two rooms within a Northern
Territory Department of Education (DEET NT) building in the community –
a main room for community use, with eight donated iMac desktop
workstations, and a Kunkgas’ room for women and children (as discussed
in the previous chapter) with four iMac desktop computers and a lounge
area. The computer room relied chiefly on a series of volunteers on
short-term contracts to provide administrative and training/mentoring to
community members who use its facilities. Use of the computers and
equipment was free, so as not to discourage any community members from
using the facility. The computer room possessed both an ethernet and
wireless network (ADSL) in mid-2012 shortly after the study. The
community received mobile coverage in late March 2014.

The main use of computers at the PCR was as a form of entertainment,
rather than for communication administrative activities or formal
education. Collaborative and creative industries activities featured
more significantly at the PCR, but were non-existent in the project
communities, which reflects the relative capacity and sophistication of
the PCR and the community’s connections with creative enterprises, such
as the Papunya-Tula and Papunya Tjupi arts movements, and well-known
local bands such as the Warumpi Band and the Tjupi Band. Use of the
internet for administrative purposes was lower than on the outstations.
While some community members used computers for online shopping,
relatively few people undertook tasks such as accessing banking and
online services and resources on the PCR terminals. However, there was
less need to use the internet at Papunya to contact service agencies,
given the presence of government services and organizations such as the
Central Land Council (CLC) and the Congress Aboriginal Health Service
within the community. When we interviewed PCR staff in 2014, they said
that the computers were still being used mainly for entertainment,
although Facebook had emerged as a new significant usage. While the
coordinator had ‘set up a lot of online banking and things like that’,
people generally accessed bank and Centrelink accounts at terminals
available for those purposes at the community store, the Centrelink and
Shire offices at Papunya.

### The Evolution of the Maku Shed

In September 2013, the PCR transitioned to the Maku Shed, a
multi-purpose hub that provides a range of social engagement activities
for the community. The Maku Shed is a large Nissen hut at Papunya, which
had been re-purposed as a men’s social club with pool tables and large
screens for watching sport. The computers were moved into the Maku Shed
to provide additional activities as part of an overarching exercise in
community development that sought to take the computer room to the next
level as a self-sufficient enterprise. It was also fuelled by the need
to find a larger space for the computer facility, and to support other
popular community activities, such as a cooking and nutrition program,
and to address the long-term sustainability of the PCR, which had been
surviving on a patchwork of philanthropic funds sourced by the Central
Australian Youth Link Up Service (CAYLUS).

Papunya store, which is required to put half its profits into community
development, supported the transition to the Maku Shed as their main
community development project for 2014. At the time, the Papunya store
was paying the PCR coordinator’s salary, as well as the Maku Shed’s
power and water bills. Internet and computer use at the Maku Shed was
made available on a ticketing system, priced from \$0.50 to \$1, with
tickets supplied by the Northern Territory Remote Indigenous Public
Internet Access (RIPIA). Soft drinks and evening meals were also sold.
While the funds raised by these sales only covered the internet plan,
the idea was to give people an understanding of what is involved in
running a small business, and to encourage a greater sense of community
ownership.

Co-author Eleanor visited Papunya in June 2014 for an update on the
transition to the Maku Shed, and on the use of mobile phones after
coverage had been extended to the community. The Maku Shed was still
using the computers that had been donated to the PCR in 2009 by a youth
organization in Melbourne, although some were ‘dying a little’. CAYLUS
had given Papunya several more computers since the Shed’s opening, and
in June 2014, there were eleven functional computers at the Maku Shed,
with three in for repair.

### Access and Participation at the Maku Shed

In the previous chapter, we discussed how, with the move into a larger,
multi-purpose space at the Maku Shed, the PCR staff found there were
fewer issues involving avoidance relationships and gender segregation.
Ensuring that the computer room was open during hours that were suited
to different age groups in the community became a key factor in
facilitating greater access.

The Maku Shed hours were changed to a later time slot (1-9 pm) to cater
for the use of the facility for youth activities, and so that people
could avoid the extremes in temperature by visiting later in the day.
The computers were popular with primary school-age kids and teenagers
after school, with 17-30-year olds being their main users at night.
Consequently, older adults, especially those who were working, were less
likely to use the computers. The Maku Shed supervisor commented: ‘There
are so many kids in here, from 3:30 to 6 pm; it's so intense the adults
don't want to be in here.’ It was rare for anyone over 60 to use the
Maku Shed, although middle-aged community members occasionally visited.

CAYLUS and the Papunya store were initially concerned that particular
family groups might dominate, as they had at other facilities in the
community. We also heard of this occuring in other communities where
shared internet facilities were operating. However, the Maku Shed
supervisor thought that avoidance relationships had proved to be less of
an issue with the move of the shared facility into a larger space,
suggesting that it was more likely that particular family members would
commandeer the computer in smaller spaces, including households. She
gave an example of a family who’d had a computer at home, but had ended
up coming to the Maku Shed because one person had monopolized use of the
computer. By contrast, the emphasis of the Maku Shed was ‘more about
sharing with community’, rather than being family-oriented. People even
came to the Maku Shed to ‘sit on the couch, using their phones because
it's a lot more exciting than being at home’.

### Supervision, Training and Mentoring at the Maku Shed

Staffing arrangements, training and mentoring activities played a
further role in increasing social inclusion at the shared facility in
both of its versions as the PCR and the Maku Shed. When the computer
room was located in the smaller DEET NT building, there really needed to
be staff of the same sex as users in each of the main and Kungkas’ rooms
to ensure that members of both sexes would patronize the facility, and
would receive digital literacy training and support.

CAYLUS and PCR staff mooted that whitefella involvement would always be
necessary at a remote community computer facility, because of kinship
obligations and avoidance relationships (‘Family relationships get the
better of people, because of the level of humbug from kids and so on’).
However, greater engagement of community members of both sexes and from
different family groups, including autonomously for short periods of
time, occurred with the transition to a larger space at the Maku Shed,
along with the development of greater ICT skills amongst community
members over time. A team of ten local residents supported the Maku Shed
supervisor in overseeing use of the computers, but also in running the
facility when she was absent from Papunya. In order to deal with any
avoidance relationship issues, a male and a female, usually a member of
one of the community’s prominent families and someone from another
family, were normally left in charge of the Maku Shed.

Scheduling training at appropriate times was mentioned as a significant
issue. The Maku Shed supervisor observed external training providers:
‘They choose to do it at the wrong time. If you want to engage people, I
think it should be done at nighttime, for one. That's when people are
most active around here as well, particularly in summer.’ She stressed
that, in providing training to remote community members, it was
necessary ‘to be flexible with time. And be really opportunistic. Just
grab people when you can. Form those relationships with people so
they'll want to attend your class, rather than just say when it's on’.
The need for flexibility, along with an individual focus and the
development of relationships with community members to understand their
learning needs, also accords with aspects of our experience of
delivering training to communities in the project.

By contrast, when an outside organization had offered a computer skills
course at Papunya – which was held only for a specific week – attendance
rates were low, with the ‘usual suspects’ participating and receiving
certificates. This outcome was not unusual; organized training had poor
participation and success rates across the board at Papunya. ‘Last time
anyone tried to do training on an organized scale, only four people got
certificates’, the PCR co-ordinator remarked to us in July 2014, ‘and
they were four people who were pretty much guaranteed to get
certificates anyway’. Community members also perceived a lack of purpose
to the organized training delivered at Papunya – that it was unlikely to
provide a pathway to local employment. ‘People have been trained in a
thousand things’, the PCR co-ordinator observed, ‘but there's no
capacity to work \[for employment – i.e. very few jobs available
locally\].’ Likewise, the trainers delivering courses generally did not
canvas what community members wished to learn, how they wished to learn,
or build relationships through which they might gain some idea of
people’s learning needs.[^248]

### Shared Facilities and Long-term Sustainability

Of the ICT access models available, the shared facility approach, of
which the PCR/Maku Shed is the most highly developed, offers the lowest
implementation costs, because all the facilities are centralized and
shared. However, the operational costs can be very high. These may
include the cost for renting secure building space (assuming that is
available, which is often not the case), or the expensive alternative of
constructing a new building, and of providing and accommodating a
supervisor for the Centre.

The access center model will always be constrained by the need for the
security of the facility and the availability of a supervisor, and for
these reasons most centers only open during business hours, and
sometimes for only a few days per week. Supervision brings the obvious
benefit that a skilled person is on hand to assist users in using
unfamiliar applications, providing ICT training, and solving particular
support problems. The access center can also be an effective vehicle for
supporting school-based computing activities, provided there is
effective collaboration between the schoolteachers and the center
supervisor. However, subsidizing the costs associated with engaging a
supervisor can be difficult. While these supervisory positions are often
staffed by one or more volunteers to reduce costs, that approach
introduces a greater than normal administrative overhead to recruit,
orientate and manage volunteers who may only stay in the community for
one or two months. In the transition from the PCR to the Maku Shed,
introducing a fee-for-access model and sales of small items, was
insufficient to support a supervisor’s salary, and funds had to be
sourced from other community development enterprises within Papunya – an
arrangement unlikely to be feasible in a minor community.

### The Community WiFi Model

Since the Home Internet Project commenced, another ICT option has been
introduced into the remote Northern Territory Aboriginal context: access
to community WiFi points and networks. One of the first versions of this
approach accompanied the development of the solar-powered satellite
community phone in 2009 by APN (the owners of ISP Activ8) for use at
small outstations in remote areas. Approximately 300 of these
Commonwealth government-funded phones are now in service at remote
locations with a population of less than fifty people, and have all been
enhanced to provide WiFi access points. This arrangement operates on a
‘BYOD’ (Bring Your Own Device) basis in which individual users supply
their own WiFi-equipped laptop, tablet or smartphone computing device to
connect to the internet. In 2014, one of the women in Imangara told us
she had been using one of these WiFi points when visiting a family
outstation. She was very pleased that it was available.

Most versions of the Community WiFi model implemented in remote
communities to date are similar to the enhanced solar-powered satellite
community phone one, insofar as they are BYOD and consist of a single
WiFi access point, which concentrates all ICT users, and hence traffic,
around a single point and internet source in the community. But unless
the community is small (for example, a family-sized outstation), a
single domestic National Broadband Network (NBN) satellite service is
unlikely to have the capacity to provide sufficient broadband speed for
all the users who may wish to connect simultaneously. WiFi is
technically limited to a radius of about 50 meters from the access
point, and coverage typically diminishes further with obstacles such as
vegetation and building walls (particularly metal-clad walls) in the
way, making use within community buildings and houses unreliable. The
larger the community, the more access points are needed to provide
realistic coverage, particularly if equity of access for all residents
is to be ensured.

The potential benefits of WiFi include the ability to install filters
and to restrict access when individuals are found to be causing harm
online. The spatial consequences of WiFi – how and where individuals
access the internet – is an area that requires further investigation.
For instance, in April 2015, CAYLUS called for free WiFi to be installed
in Alice Springs town camps as a diversionary activity for young people
(2015b). A news article quoted Nicholas Williams, a youth worker at
CAYLUS, observing that before WiFi was available in Hermannsburg, kids
were more likely to be ‘breaking in areas, hanging around where they’re
not supposed to’.[^249] Since the WiFi became available, kids tended to
use that area, knowing it is ‘their area’, even after hours.

An example of a community WiFi network which seeks to respond to equity
of access issues is that at Milyakburra, a remote settlement on
Bickerton Island. This arrangement was set up under the Commonwealth
government-funded RIPIA scheme, which at the time was mostly supporting
ICT access via library facilities in Northern Territory Top End
communities; however, RIPIA installed a WiFi network at Milyakburra
because it was so small that it lacked a library or other suitable
community building. The network consisted of two wireless access points
installed on high points (the roof of the business center and a
centrally-located radio mast) within the community, and in-home wireless
repeaters were installed in each dwelling so that internet access could
be extended to premises at the edge of the community, thus ensuring
equity of access on a household basis. Reports from the Northern
Territory RIPIA scheme indicated that WiFi access at hubs such as
libraries in Top End communities were likewise well-patronized, day and
night, by users with mobile devices inside or outside the
buildings.[^250]

In order to access WiFi hotspots, residents need mobile devices such as
smart phones, tablets or laptops. However, the prices of iPads, laptops
and other mobile devices can be prohibitive if bought at community
stores rather than at electronics shops in regional centers and cities.
We observed a number of people purchasing devices on rent-to-buy plans,
spending as much as \$1,500 in total on an iPad in 2013. The expense and
lack of availability of such devices in some very remote locations could
undermine the social inclusiveness of this model.

### Mobile Telephony

By mid 2015, mobile broadband coverage for Indigenous residents of
central Australia was limited to about 8,500 people in fourteen discrete
locations (another four locations were identified as roadhouses and
mines), which constituted approximately half the total Indigenous
population of the region. [^251] Four of these sites were completed in
2014 as a joint project between Telstra and the Northern Territory
government.[^252]

A number of studies have noted the high rates of mobile phone adoption
in remote communities since 2007. Early studies focused on mobile
telephony as a substitute for basic telephony services, and therefore
did not cover internet use – unsurprising given that smart phone use was
lower in general at that time (30 per cent of mobile telephone services
in operation allowed internet connectivity in 2010).[^253] Moreover,
data rates for prepaid mobile broadband were high at that point in time,
and iPhone and Android phones, which provided the first easy icon-based
access to applications rather than internet web browsers, were released
in 2007 and 2008 respectively. However, these studies do provide useful
insights into the social aspects of early mobile phone adoptions and
use. *Ingerrekenhe Antirrkweme*, a 2007 study of mobile phone use
amongst low-income Aboriginal people in Alice Springs and town camps,
found that 56 per cent owned mobile phones.[^254] Of the respondents, 72
per cent lived in town (including 33 per cent who lived in town camps
where mobile coverage is available), and 25 per cent lived in remote
communities. In terms of mobile phone ownership, 69 per cent of those
who lived in town had a mobile phone, compared with only 35 per cent of
those who lived in remote communities. Participants who were on
Centrelink benefits were spending 13.5 per cent of their income on their
mobile phone.

Researchers Brady, Dyson and Asela also noted ‘the very high rate of
mobile adoption’ amongst remote-living Indigenous people where there was
mobile coverage.[^255] Their study of the Indigenous take-up of mobile
telephony on an island in the Torres Strait, published in 2008,
attributed the mobile phone’s popularity amongst the Aboriginal
population to its relative cheapness and portability, especially in
remote contexts where people frequently travel long distances. Mobile
phones are also valuable for remote-living people in maintaining family
and social contacts, especially given the significance of kinship
networks in Aboriginal culture.[^256] The near-ubiquity of mobile phone
ownership amongst Aboriginal people in remote Australia, in contrast to
the relatively-low uptake of other communications arrangements in these
communities, led Brady, Dyson and Asela to conclude that mobile
telephony is the most appropriate ‘fit’ for this population. They state:
‘Contrasting the enthusiasm for mobile phones and other ICT deemed
valuable by the community \[…\] versus technologies which have been used
only with reluctance or for the limited life of one-off projects
convinces us that the Indigenous people are making informed choices
about their ICT adoption.’[^257]

They attribute the preference for mobile telephony to its compatibility
with the ‘inherent strengths of the culture’ – communicating by text and
calls meshes with the orality of Indigenous tradition – and the degree
of ‘motivation’ that this form of communication elicits: that is,
‘motivation is created by fulfilling obligations to family and friends,
such as by communication and keeping in contact’. [^258]

However, the availability of mobile telephones also caused financial
problems for some, particularly in relation to data usage. In September
2009, Johnny Namayiwa of Goulburn Island, 300 kilometers northeast of
Darwin, went to the media to expose what he saw as an unfair economic
issue facing Indigenous people living in remote Australia.[^259] Mr
Namayiwa was alarmed that residents had been phoned by the
telecommunications provider, Telstra, and sold \$49 mobile plans, but
were now facing bills in excess of \$1,000. A few days later, having
investigated the issue, Telstra stated publicly that they were aware of
two such cases, and that much of the cost for the capped plans related
to internet use through the mobile phones. In this instance, Tesltra
eventually waived the bills.

### Access to Mobile Broadband in Ali Curung

Towards the end of 2013, we undertook two trips to Ali Curung, a town of
approximately 500 people near Imangara, to interview residents on their
internet use, assisted by two local women and one local man (see
description of method in Chapter 2). We spoke to eighty-five people from
forty-five households, representing 58 per cent of Ali Curung’s total
Indigenous households.

When asked, ‘Do you use the internet?’ only twenty-three (27 per cent)
were *not* using the internet when we spoke to them, and ten of those
had used it at some point in the past. Therefore, almost 1 in 7 people
who had used the internet at some time were *not* using it at the time
of the interview, demonstrating that some will fall in and out of
internet connectivity. Only thirteen people (10.5 per cent) had either
never used the internet or were not sure if they had.

Age was not a significant factor in non-use. However, younger people
were engaging with more applications and online tasks than older people,
and those with mobile broadband were doing more online than those who
accessed it only once a week or once a month. The latter group’s uses
were confined to Centrelink and checking bank balances.

As Ali Curung is only a twenty-minute drive from Imangara, we were
struck by the comparatively high rates of internet use in this larger
town, given that Imangara had such low rates when we commenced our
research. There were two possible explanations: either Ali Curung, and
possibly other communities, had experienced a sudden rise in internet
use since 2010, or factors particular to Ali Curung were influencing
people’s decision to use the internet. If most people in Ali Curung had
started using the internet in recent years, is it possible that Imangara
would have done so without our involvement? Both communities have a
similar socio-economic profile, suggesting that affordability was not
the reason for the difference, even though Imangara residents had
indicated that ‘money’ was a reason they did not have internet
connections at the start of the project. Some Imangara residents
appeared to spend time in Ali Curung on occasion (one Imangara resident
relocated to Ali Curung during the course of our research), suggesting
that some level of knowledge transfer between the communities was
likely.

We asked the residents of Ali Curung how long they had been using the
internet or had owned particular devices, and found that 65 per cent of
users had first started using the internet three years ago or less. Ali
Curung received mobile phone reception prior to 2009, and mobile phones
were the most common means of accessing the internet: 67.4 per cent of
those interviewed owned a mobile phone (or possibly had easy access to a
family member’s), and 57 per cent of those were using their mobile phone
to access the internet. However, when asked, ‘How long have you had a
mobile phone for?’, 60 per cent told us that they had possessed a mobile
phone for three years or less, suggesting that smart phone adoption and
internet use through the mobile phone had occurred in recent years in
Ali Curung, and somewhat rapidly. Only 32 per cent of people had owned a
mobile for between five and ten years, while just over 5 per cent had
owned a mobile phone for more than ten years. Tablet devices were
reasonably popular with just over 30 per cent of people in possession of
one. However, 70 per cent of those who had a tablet device had owned it
for six months or less. Of the forty-five houses, seven had a desktop
computer, only one of which was connected to the internet by a USB 3G
mobile broadband stick modem. No households had a satellite internet
connection. In addition, thirteen people were using the desktop computer
at the Shire office, but only for Centrelink and internet banking.
Nineteen people (22 per cent) told us that they had a laptop computer,
although some of these may have been shared.

Importantly, none of those who were using the internet at the time were
paying for the internet through post-paid billing. All who were paying
for the internet (forty-five in total) were purchasing pre-paid mobile
broadband credit, which was available for purchase at the store. The
decision to choose pre-paid over post-paid plans enables people to avoid
the bill shock experienced by Mr Namayiwa in the above example. One
consequence that we observed in the Ali Curung study is that people are
regularly without internet when their pre-paid credit expires, and some
were topping up credit frequently. Sharing of devices, and hence sharing
of credit, appeared to be common. One-third of those with an internet
connection stated that they sometimes shared the cost with others.

So as it turns out, internet use in Ali Curung was probably much lower
in 2010 when our first interviews in Imangara were occurring. However,
when we analyzed the evidence from the Ali Curung study in relation to
the broader findings of the home internet project, we concluded that
Imangara might not have experienced the sudden rise in internet adoption
in the absence of an assistance program. Without deliberate substitutes
(including initiatives such as community WiFi or the assistance offered
by us in the outstations), the way in which mobile broadband is sold, as
well as the simplicity of connectivity through mobile broadband devices,
circumvents some of the obstacles we observed in relation to satellite
internet on the outstations. In Chapter 9, we discuss further the
‘digital choices’ being made in remote communities, and provide a
theoretical framework for thinking through the unevenness of internet
access between communities and regions.

### The Dish

In 2014, co-author Andrew developed a low-cost means of extending mobile
coverage to locations within 40 kilometers of mobile reception. The
invention was to become the Centre for Appropriate Technology’s (CAT’s)
mobile hotspots project. Each hotspot consists of a re-purposed domestic
satellite dish, which is used to amplify a nearby mobile signal. The
structure uses no power or software to operate, and needs no
maintenance, requiring only to be placed at a suitable height within the
(extended) range. The first hotspot was placed in Boggy Hole,
established in conjunction with the CLC, and allows tourists and locals
who have become stuck on the notoriously-bad road to the Finke National
Park to call for help.[^260] The hotspot is now also being used in
communities just outside of mobile range, and at other highway spots
where people can be stranded waiting for a lift or bus. In 2015, the
Northern Territory government and the Aboriginals Benefit Account funded
a total of thirty dishes in the central Australia region. Among the
first sites to get a dish were Imangara, which receives a signal from
Ali Curung; Tara, which now benefits from the Barrow Creek mobile phone
tower (Chapter 1); and the bus stop on the Stuart Highway at the turnoff
to Ali Curung.

### International Developments: Microtelcos

In 2013, an independent ISP in Papua, Indonesia, turned their existing
network into mobile broadband using a low-cost, open source base station
technology created by US start-up company Endaga, created by PhD student
Kurtis Heimerl at the University of California, Berkeley. The ability to
access voice, SMS and data over mobile phones meant that those living in
the village could easily reach people who were gathering supplies in
town, a two-day trip by road.[^261] Endaga provides a retail mechanism,
including SIM cards and internationally-recognizable phone numbers that
enable entrepreneurs to establish their own ‘microtelco’ and charge
users for calls. The technology is robust, does not require expensive
protection from the elements and airconditioning, and can be mounted in
trees or on water towers as long as there is a power source.

A number of remote Indigenous communities in Mexico have also installed
low-cost mobile base stations, and are transmitting using spectrum that
is made available for Indigenous community radio in places where that
spectrum is neglected by national spectrum licensees (under Mexico’s
constitution).[^262] The Mexican network was established through
Rhizomatica, an NGO with a mission to ‘increase access to mobile
telecommunications to the over 2 billion people without affordable
coverage and the 700 million with none at all’.[^263] Previously,
residents were using landlines that charged a per-minute fee, required
standing in line, and using runners to inform each other of incoming
calls. Following years of unsuccessful lobbying to get telecommunication
companies to provide mobile broadband services, the communities decided
to use their municipal money to establish their own community-owned and
operated micro-telecommunications enterprises in rural Oaxaca, Mexico,
with each base station costing approximately \$US7,500.[^264] In January
2015, Mexico assigned radiospectrum ‘cellular’ bands for ‘social use’,
and created fifteen-year not-for-profit licences.

Mobile telephony has become a significant enabler in the developing
world, used for financial transactions such as remittance payments from
migrant workers to their home families, or assisting small-scale farmers
and traders to share information. Often the ‘everyday’ means of being
informed and communicating, write Goggin and Clark, can result in
economic and social opportunities, ‘activating important dimensions of
human rights in development, building upon and extending the
well-recognised contribution of telecommunications’.[^265]

In *The Great Indian Phone Book: How Cheap Mobile Phones Change
Business, Politics and Daily Life*, Robin Jeffrey and Assa Doron
describe how telecommunications companies competed with each other
during the early 2000s to capture the large population base of poor and
illiterate people in India as a market in order to ensure the viability
of the roll-out of mobile telephone infrastructure. Thus: ‘\[T\]ens of
millions of people had to acquire telephones if mobile telephony was to
reward the huge investment required to build and maintain vast networks
of mobile cell-towers.’[^266] The competition between companies resulted
in dramatic cuts to the cost of calls and phones in an effort to make
prepaid mobile phone plans affordable ‘even \[for\] those who could make
only a small investment’.[^267] However, a further aspect of courting
this low-socio-economic-status market base involved tailoring their
customer service experience so that it was ‘cheap, easy and fast’.[^268]
One company, Bharti Airtel, tried to incorporate a range of retail
outlets into their sales chain, and to demystify the processes around
obtaining and using mobile phones by training a network of dealers to
sell and install SIM cards on new customers’ phones: ‘To the
uninitiated, the procedure seemed difficult, though it took only a few
experiments with phones to learn how to change SIM cards
confidently.’[^269] This simple process, however, involved a significant
outlay of financial and training resources, as ‘it took thousands of
hours of training to bring tens of thousands of hours of training to
bring tens of thousands of distributors, travelling salespersons and
small shopkeepers to a basic level of confidence’.[^270] While that
scale of operation would not be required to train an ISP’s customer
service representatives to broker satellite broadband access and plan
payment for remote Indigenous consumers, the market drivers stimulating
competition between the Indian telecommunications companies to create
cheaper phone packages and more user-friendly processes for a low
socio-economic status group do not exist to the same degree in remote
Indigenous Australia.

Galperin and Girard see potential in microtelcos, defined by Galperin as
‘small-scale telecom operators that combine local entrepreneurship,
innovative business models, and low-cost technologies to offer an array
of ICT services in areas of little interest to traditional
operators’.[^271] Microtelcos promise to overcome inequities in mobile
broadband access due to their creative approaches to capital, labor and
technology that ‘maximize returns based on their knowledge of local
conditions and demand preferences’. Microtelcos are thus capable of
‘finding business models (including payment collection mechanisms)
appropriate to local conditions’ where large operators are reluctant to
go.[^272]

What are the prospects for microtelcos in Australia’s remote Indigenous
communities? Australian telecommunications spectrum regulation does not
allow for ‘use it or lose it’ style spectrum access that Indigenous
communities in Mexico exploited. However, in Australia, individuals and
organizations can apply to the ACMA for a public telecommunications
service licence using various paired frequency ranges.

The cost of a microcell itself is perhaps affordable for small
communities that have access to mining royalties and the like (within
the range of USD\$3,000-6,000, although electricity and maintenance
costs would also need to be factored in). Microtelcos can operate to a
reasonable standard using non-geostationary satellite backhaul.[^273]
However, the costs of backhaul can be high in Australia. It is also
worth noting that although companies such as Endaga provide phone
numbers and interconnection to service providers, in 2015 the wholesale
price of a single phone number (purchased by the service provider and
presumably factored into call charges) is currently six times that of a
phone number in the US, and incurs incoming call costs. Therefore,
although microtelcos could emerge in remote Australia, providing a
competitive call charge rate to consumers could be a challenge.

As discussed in Chapter 1, Australia’s Universal Obligation provides
subsidies to the Universal Service Obligations (USO) provider (Telstra)
for standard telephone services and payphones only. As Stuart Corner
writes, when the Labor government made changes to the USO 2012 (in order
to accommodate the NBN), many believed that an opportunity for radical
reform was missed, including the possibility of a USO that would take
account of the ‘popularity and reliance on mobile telephony’.[^274] If
the USO was adapted to encompass mobile voice services, then subsidies
could be directed towards the most socially-desirable infrastructure,
perhaps paving the way for greater penetration of mobile coverage in
remote Australia.

### Conclusion

In Chapter 1, we discussed the history of telecommunications in remote
Australia as being defined by the consequences of low population
density, where metropolitan areas have subsidized infrastructure to
regional and rural areas.[^275] The various scenarios outlined above,
including computer centers and public WiFi, are attempts to provide some
means of access in conditions of market failure. Public WiFi, which in
other contexts is a transitory solution for people when away from home
and work, is intended as a first level of service in some remote
communities, making up for the lack of fibre optic and mobile broadband
infrastructure. Remote communities, such as the Maku Shed in Papunya,
have been experimenting with how to make public WiFi sustainable.
However, there is no clear path to ensuring that WiFi or mobile
broadband are possible in communities of all sizes, or how these might
tie in with existing infrastructure and legislative technologies such as
the NBN and the USO.

<span id="_Toc419811702" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811501" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc318452858" class="anchor"></span></span></span>Chapter 9: Digital Choices
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In 2010 we presented the outstation residents with a list of reasons
that might explain why they had not already purchased internet
subscriptions, based on what they had told us in earlier consultations.
We then asked them to rank the reasons in order of significance. The
greatest barrier to internet adoption turned out to be what we, for the
sake of language simplicity, had called ‘no cash/too costly/\$’. Other
reasons included ‘Not important’; ‘No-one to help fix them’; ‘Don’t know
how to use it’; ‘English too hard to read’ (we verbally explained the
list for those for whom English was indeed too hard to read). By the end
of the project when residents were given the option to maintain the
internet at their own expense, ‘no cash’ emerged again as the major
factor. However, ‘no cash’ was not necessarily just a matter of
affordability, but of a more complex and intertwined set of issues to do
with the flow of money within and out of the community, time-specific
spending priorities, and – most importantly – the difficulties of paying
for internet and navigating payment systems. Some of the other barriers
identified at the start of the project were also likely to have related
to the broad category of money, such as poor English language inhibiting
people from understanding the various contracts on offer.

Thus the problem of money was not necessarily a matter of what one was
prepared to pay, but of how things were paid for. As discussed in the
previous chapter, satellite broadband was available at cheaper rates
than mobile broadband in Ali Curung, and yet none of the households we
spoke to (half of all houses in that community) had a satellite internet
subscription at the time, while around 70 per cent of people had mobile
broadband. Not everyone managed to maintain a prepaid mobile broadband
all the time, which indicates that affordability was indeed an issue.
However, it was clear that people were willing to pay for the internet
when they could, but only under circumstances that suited them.

The concept of the digital divide is based on the idea that consumer
choice alone will not create an equitable society (see Chapter 2).
However, what if the choices on offer – including the retail mechanism
and devices – were to change or expand? Some of these offerings might
meet the needs of those who were formerly not able, or not inclined, to
adopt. Moreover, once some people acquire the internet, they may
influence others to do the same. In this chapter, we explore the social
dimensions of ‘digital choices’ in relation to the digital divide in
remote Australia. In the final part of the chapter, we provide a theory
to explain the digital divide in remote Australia, which we call ‘the
demic dealbreaker’, expanding on economic choice theory to take into
account how the sociality of place and network effects can lead entire
communities and groups to adopt or not to adopt. The theory provides a
means for thinking through different arrangements and policy approaches
that may help to resolve the digital divide in remote Australia.

### The Digital Divide and Disadvantage

Two decades of digital divide studies tell us that internet adoption
falls along socio-economic lines, relating variation in the use of
digital and online resources to differential social advantage.[^276]
Early studies revealed that those who were quick to adopt the internet
were earning more, and had higher levels of schooling, than those who
were not. The trend continued, with those least likely to use the
internet also the most socially excluded.[^277] For instance, Helsper’s
analysis of three major datasets in the UK revealed that three out of
four of those who suffer ‘deep’ social exclusion have only limited
engagement with internet-based services, and are seven times more likely
to be disengaged from the internet than those who are socially
advantaged.[^278] The ‘stratification hypothesis’ is also supported in
the World Internet Project, which revealed that the internet is used
more by the highest-income quartiles in twelve participating countries.
[^279]

In the case of Indigenous Australia, it is possible to draw a
correlation between the digital divide and disadvantage. A series of
studies by the Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research has found
that, overall, Indigenous people living in urban and town locations are
better off than those living in remote areas. In all parts of the
country (remote and non-remote, with a significant Indigenous
population), Indigenous people were also found to be worse off than
non-Indigenous Australians living nearby across a range of
socio-economic measures, including educational attainment, income, labor
force participation and housing.[^280] They are also the least likely to
have an internet connection at home, seemingly supporting the hypothesis
that social exclusion and digital exclusion influence each other.[^281]
In an analysis of the 2006 census data, the Australian Bureau of
Statistics suggested that ‘the lower rate of connectivity for Indigenous
people might be attributed to a range of several socio-economic
factors’.[^282] The statistics reflect significant hardship experienced
by many living in remote communities, hardships that many of households
in this book experienced to varying degrees, from subtle to extreme.

However, as discussed in Chapter 8, by 2013, broadband adoption was high
in Ali Curung, where there were different choices on offer through
mobile broadband retail. We confirmed this observation through a close
analysis of 2011 census data. The result aligned with our own
observations of differences between Ali Curung and outstations where
satellite was the only option: where there was mobile broadband, people
were far more willing or able to have an internet connection.

In 2011, only 11 locations in the southern half of the Northern
Territory (south of 19 degrees South) had mobile phone coverage. These
were the townships of Alice Springs and Tennant Creek (including town
camps), the tourist resort of Yulara (near Uluru), three highway stops,
and five remote Indigenous communities (Yuendumu, Hermannsburg, Ti Tree,
Santa Teresa and Ali Curung). The towns, their town camps (Indigenous
housing estates), and the five remote communities can be identified in
the census data using the Indigenous Structure of the Australian
Statistical Geography Standard, which enables analysis of discreet
communities, or of a group of small communities in a given area.[^283]
Where the boundaries correspond to a particular community or town with
mobile reception, it can be assumed that most of the houses in that
Indigenous Location (ILOC) have coverage, or are in close enough
proximity to mobile reception for it to be a viable option for broadband
consumers. This is not the case with three ILOCs that cover large areas,
and where there were likely only to be pockets of reception: ‘Julalikari
– Outstations’ (forty Indigenous households, some of which may be in
close proximity to Tennant Creek), ‘South MacDonnell Ranges’
(seventy-two Indigenous households, some of which may be in close
proximity to Alice Springs), and ‘Tjuwanpa Outstations’ (thirty-eight
Indigenous households, some of which may be within range of Hermannsburg
mobile reception).

We found that across all ILOCs known to have mobile reception in 2011,
at least 40 per cent of households had an internet connection of some
kind (13 percent were not stated and 47 per cent reported they had no
internet connection). This compares with only 4 per cent of households
with an internet connection in areas that did not have mobile reception.
(The number increases to 7 per cent when the Julalikari, South
MacDonnell Ranges and Twanpa Outstations are included – nonetheless a
striking difference).

It is worth noting that although it should be possible to tell from the
census data what kind of connection people were using, we decided that
this particular information was unreliable, and therefore used only the
‘internet/no internet’ figures.[^284] As Indigenous households in many
of these communities share a similar socio-economic profile, we can
conclude that social exclusion is not necessarily the cause of digital
exclusion. Even when money is tight, we found that many people are
prepared to pay for the internet when they have experienced it on an
ongoing basis. Internet adoption is not ‘determined’ by one’s
socio-economic status, but can be a choice that is made when various
factors of convenience and motivation are weighed up. The reasons
underpinning the decision to purchase internet services, and the
circumstances that inform that choice, are intricately tied up in
contemporary and traditional obligations and patterns, and the pressures
and preoccupations of daily life. We return to this point at the end of
the chapter, discussing how the decisions of some can, through network
effects, slow down internet adoption for the community or group. First,
however, it is necessary to examine the ‘digital choices’ informing
internet adoption in remote communities.

### ‘Worry About the Internet’

We returned to the communities four months after the transition to
self-funded internet access arrangements to see how they’d fared. We
planned to drive from Alice to Tennant Creek, visiting Mungalawurru
first, but we stopped off at Imangara en route to remind them we’d be
visiting later in the week.

When we drove into the community, Mary hurried out onto her verandah and
said there’d been 'worry about the internet'. She was particularly
concerned about not being able to access her bank account. We then
talked to another woman, Louise, who told us that her internet
connection was still working – she’d been checking Westpac and Gumtree
but she hadn't been able to use her email account. She produced a letter
she’d received from the internet service provider (ISP), which she
didn’t understand, and showed it to us. The letter was dated four months
previously, and it said that the ISP had changed her password to protect
her privacy, and that she would have to ring them to get the new one.
She also told us that Emily’s WiFi wasn't working; she wasn't sure why,
but she thought Emily mightn’t have paid the bill.

We weren’t totally surprised by these developments, because co-author
Andrew had noticed problems with payment of some accounts before we’d
left Alice Springs. Mary had also rung him a couple of times, wanting to
know what had happened to her internet access. When we stopped off at
the store near Imangara, the storekeeper told us she thought some
community members’ accounts had lapsed after three months because they
hadn’t paid their bills. She observed that most people in the community
seemed to spend their money quickly, on or just after ‘payday’, when
they received either wages or social security payments. The older people
in particular tended to swipe through as many purchases as possible,
often for younger family members, until their available credit was
exhausted. The absence of money in their accounts so soon after payday
would also explain why so many of the ISP’s direct debits bounced,
because the monthly billing date would not necessarily coincide with the
fortnightly wage and social security payments community members
received.

We encountered a similar situation at Mungalawurru the next morning. One
family had been using their computer to lodge their Centrelink forms
until one day in February, when the internet had stopped working. The
husband had intended to submit his form that day, but lodged it in town
instead because ‘the internet was closed’. They’d tried a neighbour’s
house but the internet was not working there either. 'Everyone's using
the phone now’ to lodge their Centrelink forms, the wife told us. When
we rang the ISP later, they confirmed that they would give customers
three months' grace to pay bills before cutting them off. Payments had
been going through to their account for a time, but when the payments
stopped, the ISP eventually cut them off.

When we saw the neighbour the next day in Tennant Creek, she told us
that although she was having problems accessing the internet on her home
computer, payment wasn’t the issue: she was up to date with her account.
Andrew checked online on their behalf, and made a list of who was not up
to date with payments, and the neighbour wasn’t one of them.

The following morning, we visited Karen, who’d been living in a town
camp in Tennant Creek (since moving from Mungalawurru) to be with her
eldest son when he started school. She was using a prepaid mobile phone
plan (\$40) to access the internet on her computer, which she topped up
regularly: ‘I’d never want it to run out because I like the internet.’
She was still the main computer user in the house, and downloaded music
onto USB keys for other family members. Although she kept the computer
in a ‘special place’, she preferred using it in Mungalwurru where it was
‘okay’ – that is, safer because she had more control over it.

In the afternoon, we drove back to Imangara and organized a meeting at
the Women’s Centre the next day, so people could ring the ISP and sort
out their billing situation. It had been raining heavily in the Barkly
the week before our visit, and people were more comfortable sitting
outside the Centre on plastic chairs rather than clustering around a
telephone booth in the mud. A group of people joined us, and Andrew rang
the ISP. He told the support person that we were ringing from a remote
community in the Northern Territory, then put one of the residents on
the phone. She had had problems reading the original letter from the
ISP; it wasn’t clear whether this was because of sight or literacy
issues, or a combination of both. The ISP representative gave the woman
an email ID and a new password, which Andrew recorded for her. Another
woman spoke to the ISP about her billing situation and the debt on her
account. When we’d spoken to her the previous day, it wasn’t clear
whether she realized her internet connection had stopped working because
she hadn’t paid, or for some other technical reason. The ISP was
prepared to waive her bill if she paid \$40 in the next couple of days.

After the meeting outside the Women’s Centre, we visited Mary to discuss
her billing situation. We suggested to her that she ask some of her
grandsons to contribute to the bill, which by then had accrued to \$140,
because it wasn’t fair that she should pay the whole thing when they
were using the internet too. We weren’t sure whether Mary would run with
this idea, but she said, ‘No, it’s not fair’, and, nodding at her
grandson, ‘Don’t worry, I’ll deal with this’. She addressed him in
language; he looked uncomfortable, but agreed that he would make a
contribution to the bill. Mary wanted to alternate the direct debit
payments between herself and the grandson on a monthly basis, but we
told her this wouldn’t be possible, and that he’d have to organize a
transfer from his account or pay her \$20 in cash per month. The man’s
wife agreed; she’d been quietly following the conversation, in deference
to Mary as a senior woman perhaps, but she seemed to be on top of the
detail.

We saw Mary later that day. She’d been down to check her account at the
store, but discovered she didn’t have enough money to pay the
outstanding amount. We said it was possible the ISP might waive her bill
with a part payment, as they’d done with others’. In any case, she
seemed keen to maintain internet access so she could check her
Centrelink and bank balances, but also for her adult children’s and
grandchildren’s use.

As mentioned at the start of the chapter, we expected that ‘billing and
household economics \[would\] play a role’, and speculated that the
interplay of factors such as low incomes, high unemployment rates, and
higher-than-average numbers of dependents living in remote community
households would have some impact on affordability, though we did not
know which factors would prove most significant.[^285] While cost did
not impact greatly on community members’ choices to continue internet
access during the transition period, billing and management of payment
of plans emerged within several months of the introduction of
self-funded internet arrangements as a decisive factor affecting their
capacity to maintain internet access on the home computers.

In particular, the incapacity of the ISP’s billing mechanisms to
accommodate aspects of the remote community members’ circumstances
proved problematic, such as their style of social organization, along
with the level of English literacy and whitefella administrative
facility required to negotiate interactions with the ISP’s processes and
customer service representatives.

### Facilitating Equitable ICT Access in Remote Indigenous Communities

The immediate change for householders after the transition was the need
to pay for their own individual internet accounts. However, since the
services and facilities were already in place in the communities,
affordability was not such a major factor, because the actual amounts
people chose to pay for internet plans were fairly modest (\$3540 per
month). Generally, those households who prioritized ICT access were
likely to be able to find the resources to keep an individual internet
service operational, even though it was not subsidized. Residents were
also aware of the costs associated with appliances and energy
consumption, and knew that computer usage could increase their power
bills (already averaging around \$50 a month). This awareness of the
need to manage increased household service costs was also reflected by
some residents’ attempts to limit other community members’ and visitors’
computer and internet access through the use of passwords, and thus
control their power bills.

Despite the willingness of some community members to allocate a portion
of household budgets to internet services, navigating and managing the
ISP’s billing mechanisms proved problematic for them. About half the
householders struggled over the first six months to maintain sufficient
balances in their nominated bank accounts to support the monthly
payments when they became due, resulting in temporary loss of internet
access in some cases, and much larger withdrawals when the accrued fee
was eventually debited. While in theory the ISP offers a pre-paid
account option that might relieve this situation, it requires payment
for six months’ usage in advance, which is too high a lump sum payment
for remote community residents operating on very low incomes. One
obvious improvement would be a ‘pay by the Gigabyte’ pre-paid satellite
broadband option, analogous to the well-established pre-paid SIM option
for mobile phones, which would overcome the need to involve the
customer’s financial institution in both the application process and
monthly billing. However, in our conversations with retail service
providers, we learnt that such arrangements are thwarted by the way in
which they are required to purchase satellite capacity from the
wholesaler, the National Broadband Network (NBNCo).

The Central Australian Youth Link Up Service (CAYLUS) has documented
similar situations that have emerged in other central Australian
communities without mobile coverage, in which local families applied
with the assistance of the local regional council for satellite accounts
under the NBN so that they could have internet access on a household
basis.[^286] These internet services have since fallen into disuse after
families defaulted on payment for broadband plans. Households were
unable to pay the bills because their resources were spread too thinly
amongst a large number of highly-mobile residents, making regular
payment almost impossible. As in the post-transition phase at the
communities, these residents struggled with the administrative processes
required to terminate the direct debit arrangements, because of the
level of ‘English legalese’ needed to negotiate with service providers.
Some people who signed up for direct debit for internet plan charges
were still being billed, even though they no longer received a service.
There was no onsite or external expertise available to repair or replace
any computer equipment that was damaged. Essentially, this household
computing arrangement languished because of a lack of ongoing IT
technical support to assist community members with maintenance and
administrative issues. The only conclusion to draw from these
experiences is that subsidies for satellite broadband connection in
remote areas are not sufficient to support ongoing home computer and
internet access for remote Aboriginal communities without external
assistance for the installation process, and for more complex technical
and maintenance support issues.

At the start of the project, we speculated that provision of broadband
on a household basis might be incompatible with remote Indigenous
people’s social and economic modes of organization, because in ‘smaller
communities, the extra-household economy may be more important than the
individual household, whereby linked households share resources’, and
thus ‘\[r\]esidents might seek contributions to bills quickly from a
number of people who are not necessarily residents of that
household’.[^287]

However, as discussed in Chapter 3, households tended to be fairly
autonomous in their ownership and usage of the home computers and
internet access. Instead, the trend was towards discrete
family/household, even highly-personalized use of the PCs, even those
situated in shared, public spaces. Additionally, as the trial
progressed, there was increasing recognition of personal ownership,
particularly as people became more aware that the financial costs of
maintaining the ICT and internet access were being borne by the owners.
This in turn seems to have impacted on the extent to which, and
circumstances in which, owners were prepared to allow others to use
their computers, with people becoming less inclined to share their PCs
and internet access with individuals outside of their immediate
family/household.

As they transitioned to self-maintained services, the majority of
households opted for individual internet services and accounts (as in
the story in Chapter 3 recounted about Mary’s family’s negotiation of
ICT arrangements), with most householders being unenthusiastic about
paying for their neighbours’ use. We saw a similar trend across
households, whereby usage was confined to immediate family members
rather than shared with the community. Consequently, participants opted
to pay for internet use on a household basis, with payments made from
the account of the resident within the house who was generally the most
active in the project.

In their research into the social and economic composition of Aboriginal
households at Kuranda in north Queensland, Finlayson and Auld found
similar trends within household financial management to those discovered
by Smith:

> Economic units within households do not necessarily share resources
> and do not all contribute to the common financial costs of managing
> the dwelling itself. Even amongst core residents, joint contributions
> to household finances are not regularly given. Most household members
> take the attitude that their incomes (welfare in large part) belong
> exclusively to themselves \[…\] People without cash incomes may be
> financially supported to a certain extent by others, but such support
> cannot be relied upon for long periods.[^288]

We observed that the burden of payment for household internet access
often fell heavily on the individual whose account was used, as in the
case of a participant like Mary, who paid for her household’s internet
and computer use without receiving financial contributions from them, or
without having any straightforward way of doing so through online
billing. Ultimately, her internet plan was suspended, because the
demands from family on her finances were such that her bank account was
empty soon after payday, which meant that funds were unavailable on the
internet plan’s monthly payment date.

However, those with responsibility for the computers did come up with
some quite innovative solutions, such as those mentioned above (monthly
payments to alternate between different people’s accounts, or setting up
a separate account solely for internet plan payments). A facility to
synchronize internet plan direct debits with payment of wages or social
security benefits, potentially as a BasicsCard essential service
deduction, could also be an arrangement more suited to remote community
members. However, at the time when these particular houses were
attempting self-funded arrangements, only limited payment options were
available, and the ISP was not flexible enough to accommodate
arrangements that would be more amenable to remote community members’
financial and social circumstances.

Additionally, in Chapter 3, we noted that although the computers and
internet access were valued at a broad level by the residents, the
extent to which they were valued varied among individuals and changed
over time, and fluctuated according to circumstances. For example, there
may be instances whereby people prioritize expenditure on other items,
such as fixing a car or paying for a funeral. Billing and payment
methods not only need to be more flexible to accommodate greater
residential mobility than is the case in the mainstream, but also in
order to recognize the financial circumstances that surround many
individuals living in remote communities.

### Communication Challenges: Negotiating Whitefella Systems

The difficulties the residents encountered with the administrative
aspects of managing their internet plan and email accounts after the
transition to self-funded arrangements were not surprising. As discussed
in Chapter 2, we experienced some arduous processes when setting up the
accounts ourselves. The technical team’s facilitation of the application
for NBNCo Interim Satellite Service (ISS) services, and their
implementation on behalf of twelve households, was also a
resource-intensive experience. Each instance required a mixture of
online, postal, text message, email, and phone transactions, including
obtaining the householder’s signatures for the registration, service
application and payment forms. While the majority of such transactions
proceeded smoothly, they required regular liaison between the
facilitator, the customer and the provider to ensure that the customer
would be at home when signatures were needed, or when the installer was
due to arrive onsite. It is unlikely that the residents would have been
successful in carrying out the various steps required for the transition
to occur with their limited telecommunications options and knowledge of
the processes, combined with the NBNCo and ISP staff’s relatively
uninformed perceptions of remote community realities.

A further example of the communication issues that can emerge between
ISPs and remote community residents was the confusion caused by the
password changes the ISP made to the residents’ email accounts after the
transition. The residents’ applications for their new internet services
during the transition included the technical team’s contact details for
coordinating the installation process; the technical team members then
informed the residents of their new email addresses and passwords.
However, a couple of months after the transition occurred, the ISP
decided that the provision of these passwords to the technical team was
a security breach, because the team members were ‘not authorised
contacts for the residents’. Consequently, the ISP unilaterally changed
most of the passwords, cutting the technical team, and therefore the
residents, most of whom could not be contacted except by post, out of
the dialogue. Despite now having their new internet service, the
residents could not use email, and could not access their online account
details to make contact with the ISP. A letter arrived in the post from
the ISP some time later advising them to phone in for their new
password, but this left most residents in a state of confusion. Even
Louise, who had more facility and confidence in relating to whitefellas
and their forms of administration than most other participants,
struggled to understand the letter, because of the level of ‘legalese’
used.

The fact that even the more ICT- and financially-adept residents had not
made any attempts to contact the ISP to resolve their respective
internet and email account problems indicates how incomprehensible and
daunting the residents found aspects of the ISP’s administrative
processes to negotiate without the assistance of an intermediary. The
series of actions that ISPs require customers to go through to obtain
satellite broadband service and manage payment of an internet plan is
reasonably straightforward if the customer is readily contactable by
phone, has a good grasp of English, and has sufficient knowledge about
broadband services to be able to make an informed choice of service
plan. However, the process is much less straightforward when the
customer does not meet all of these criteria, as is often the case for
remote community residents where the only external communications option
is a single payphone.

These challenges can be further compounded by the prevalence of hearing
and eyesight issues in remote communities. For example, a woman in
Mungalawurru made the quite reasonable suggestion of dealing with
potential internet plan payment issues by setting up a separate bank
account; however, this option would not have been easy for her to manage
without the assistance formerly provided by the technical team. As well
as having to negotiate barriers such a lower level of English literacy
and the ISP’s convoluted administrative procedures, she would probably
struggle to understand a conversation with a customer service
representative because of her degree of hearing loss.

The communication issues surrounding remote community members’
self-management of internet and email accounts that emerged after the
transition to self-managed services highlight, on one hand, their
limited knowledge of, and facility with, these administrative processes,
but also the ISP’s lack of knowledge of the remote community context,
and how factors such as limited availability of telecommunications
avenues for contact, as well as low English literacy, are likely to
impact on their service’s accessibility to these populations.

An analogous situation existed at the Papunya Computer Room (PCR), where
CAYLUS managed the physical and financial aspects of the community’s
access to the internet via a shared facility, along with the provision
of technical and training support. Notably, such cultural brokerage is
facilitated within the remote Indigenous context by Aboriginal
community-controlled organizations, which frequently draw on piecemeal
funding support from available government programs and voluntary
organizations for capital, connectivity and human resources. Without
this support, the relative smallness of remote Indigenous communities,
along with their geographical isolation and differences in language and
culture, would likely render these populations largely invisible to
government policymakers and service providers. In the case of
telecommunications providers, the invisibility of remote Indigenous
populations, and the limited demand they represent as a consumer base,
means they are unlikely to address even relatively simple communication
and administrative barriers to ICT take-up. In other words, there is
little incentive for telecommunications providers to develop financial
and administrative services and processes tailored to capturing this
market, except without invoking goodwill platforms such as ‘equity of
access’, ‘global citizenship’ and ‘social inclusion’.

### Digital Choices and Demic Deal-breakers

The digital divide, at the most basic level, fits within broader
theories of innovation diffusion, in that it describes how technologies
are communicated through networks, resulting in particular patterns of
distribution. As Hilbert writes, the digital divide is an inevitable
fact when seen as the diffusion of innovation:

> Independent of the kind of network, the diffusion through a social
> network is never immediate. While the innovation spreads through the
> network and the diffusion curve unfolds, some are included and others
> excluded from the benefits of the new innovation. The result is an
> unavoidable divide. This divide is inevitable. It is the inescapable
> result of the fact that it takes a certain amount of time for
> innovations to spread through social networks with particular shapes
> and characteristics.[^289]

The inevitability of the divide exists in relation to the presence or
absence of information, in that those without information about the
technology are unable to acquire or use it. Once that information
becomes available, then presumably the divide begins to diminish.
However, even with information, some will choose not to adopt. In their
study of mobile phone adoption (discussed in Chapter 8), Brady and Dyson
write:

> Contrasting the enthusiasm for mobile phones and other ICT deemed
> valuable by the community \[…\] versus technologies which have been
> used only with reluctance or for the limited life of one-off projects
> convinces us that the Indigenous people are making informed choices
> about their ICT adoption. Recognition of the factors behind these
> choices may well lead to better ICT investment and implementation
> decisions in the future.[^290]

In this final section of the chapter, we consider the importance of
‘digital choices’ as they occur in relation to community norms and
social networks. We posit a theory of why and how the digital divide is
occurring in remote Australia, which we call the ‘demic dealbreaker’.

In her study of UK data sets, Helsper noticed that particular groups
were unexpectedly connected, defying predictors such as low
socio-economic status: ‘Some individuals within socially disadvantaged
groups are capable of overcoming barriers to digital engagement.’[^291]
For instance, disadvantaged people from Afro-Caribbean origins tended to
be more highly engaged than expected given their social disadvantages.
Helsper’s conclusion was that digital choices can be ‘driven by cultural
factors and the social context of individuals, which influence the
development of positive or negative attitudes towards technologies’, and
that ‘innovative and creative approaches’ might be required to tackle
attitudinal and cultural barriers’.[^292] The high rates of internet
adoption in Ali Curung also fit within this category of the
‘unexpectedly connected’.

Our qualitative work, as well as our analysis of the 2011 census data
for the region, suggests that it is not necessarily attitudes to
technologies that are influencing digital choices in remote Indigenous
communities, but the conditions under which technologies are made
accessible. When remote Indigenous sociality is taken into account, the
choice to purchase mobile broadband or nothing (i.e. the absence of
substitution at the margin) makes sense. Factors such as difficulties
with billing systems, inconvenience in dealing with retail providers
(related to language barriers, or lack of other infrastructures such as
home phones) are significant reasons to stay offline.

The economic choice theory of characteristic filtering (also known as
behavioural lexicographical choice theory) describes instances where
choosers set targets for particular characteristics, and eliminate
products that don’t meet those targets completely. In other words, the
chooser decides: ‘If x does not do y then I will not have anything at
all’, deciding that the missing characteristic is too important to
substitute for something else; for the chooser the missing piece is the
deal-breaker. The theory is useful for explaining some instances where
choosers do not appear to be maximizing their outcomes – choosing to
discount seemingly adequate options.[^293] However, the economic theory
of characteristic filtering only considers individuals’ decision-making;
it does not explain how the cultural norms of a group might play a role
in why some technologies are adopted and others are not.

Two further concepts are useful for expanding on choice theory to
explain how the ‘deal-breaker’ all-or-nothing decision can result in
exclusion of an entire group or community. Firstly, in the broadest
sense, Indigenous communities, like all communities, are a knowledge
group, whereby the group shares its information, stories and culture,
forming a particular set of social norms and influencing knowledge
flows. Hartley and Potts (2014) call these ‘we’ groups demes (stemming
from the Greek ‘demos’, meaning polity). The ‘demic’ aspect of the
‘deal-breaker’ scenario describes the way in which the decision only
makes sense when seen in relation to group actions, norms and
knowledge-sharing systems. We, the authors, had lengthy discussions as
to the extent to which cultural norms are a significant factor in
internet adoption, or whether practical issues (such as ability to call
the ISP) are the main reason for the choices being made. While we did
not reach an agreement on the specifics, as previous chapters have
highlighted, life in Indigenous communities involves particular dynamics
and ways of doing that influence ICT adoption and use generally.

Secondly, at the individual level, the decision not to adopt can be
based on the decision-maker’s circumstances, or attributable to a range
of factors, including whether others in the group are using digital
technologies. For some, no obvious decision is made, but they might
accept the status quo based upon what others are doing or not doing.
Those who might have little or no digital skills (for instance, those
residents who went to school prior to the introduction of computers in
classrooms) are unlikely to receive the information required to consider
internet adoption unless those they know share it with them. Therefore,
if those who might be considered (comparatively) early adopters choose
not to purchase the internet – or choose only to use it in town, for
instance – then other potential users do not get exposed to the
technology.

Social networks thus affect the quality and flow of information, and
create community norms (shared ideas about the proper way to behave).
Granovetter’s influential work on the ‘strength of weak ties’ is useful
for considering how tightly-knit communities can come to be without
internet.[^294] Granovetter argues that our acquaintances – weak social
ties – are more likely to give us new information than our close friends
and family, as those who we know already share similar knowledge. For
Indigenous communities, it is entirely possible that adoption doesn’t
begin to occur and spread until an outsider (for instance, a youth
worker) assists some people within the community with the means to
acquire internet. This might also apply to those who understand that
satellite internet is available, but have decided that it is too
difficult to acquire, but those who have no knowledge of it will remain
in the dark. Dense community ties can therefore restrict information,
and be an obstacle to technology diffusion and development more
generally.[^295] Even if some level of adoption occurs, places such as
Imangara and Mungalawurru, which do not have a permanent youth worker or
media center, are likely to have fewer of the ‘weak ties’ that might
provide particular digital literacies and skills, such as Garage Band,
which have become popular elsewhere.[^296] Uses, and not just adoption,
can thus be defined by the absence of weak ties.

Shifting the discussion of digital exclusion to ‘digital choices’
restores some agency for those for whom the decision not to adopt is a
practical choice, weighed up against a host of trade-offs and
inconveniences. When group dynamics are taken into account, broadband
adoption is not only a matter of individual choice, but a
socially-situated understanding of what will work and what will not,
where the parameters are understood within that group in ways that might
not be obvious to outsiders.

### Conclusion: the Consequences of Digital Choices

As discussed in Chapter 2, digital exclusion – like social exclusion –
needs to be understood in terms of the causal process. During our time
on the outstations, it also became apparent that digital exclusion is
not a clear-cut case of ‘haves’ and ‘have nots’. Some residents were not
using the internet as the result of a considered choice. For instance,
the man who ran the youth project in Kwale Kwale was disinclined to use
a computer, but he took up our offer to have one at his place, as other
people who assisted him on the project were able to use it. He still
experienced the benefits, and it is likely that the computer enabled
other capacities (for him and others) flowing from a more efficient
management of the records of the youth service. Such instances show
there are gradations of use, including those, known as proxy users, who
choose to access online services with the help of others.[^297]

When the digital divide is seen as a matter of digital choice rather
than social exclusion, policies and programs can emerge that provide
acceptable systems or incentives for participation. Although the
statistics show that internet adoption is higher where there is mobile
coverage, unfortunately universal mobile coverage has been deemed too
costly by telecommunications companies, and does not fall within current
government policy and funding (the Universal Service Obligations
\[USO\], as discussed in Chapter 1). However, alternative billing
options for satellite services may increase adoption in areas where
mobile is not available. Another response can be the provision of public
WiFi in communities (free or through a token system), as discussed in
the previous chapter. Understanding digital choices can also help to
anticipate what responses are unlikely to succeed, particularly where
they do not align with the socially-embedded decision-making that is
occurring. For instance, the experience of the outstations in this book
suggests that government investment in faster satellite speeds – as has
been the focus thus far of the NBN in remote areas – is unlikely in
itself to make sufficient difference for Indigenous families living in
small, traditional communities, as it does not address the
‘deal-breaker’ problem of account set-up and billing. These policy
options are discussed further in the final chapter.

The digital choices being made in remote communities should also give us
pause to consider the relationship of digital exclusion to social
exclusion. If social exclusion is not the determinant of digital
exclusion, then digital exclusion is less intractable than we might
otherwise believe. In other words, overcoming digital exclusion does not
require resolving Indigenous disadvantage more generally. In an article
on Indigenous social exclusion, Boyd Hunter makes the point that when
Indigenous social issues are seen through the lens of social exclusion,
they appear so interlinked as to seem insolvable: ‘There is a risk that
the notions of social inclusion, and to a lesser extent cumulative
causation, can lead to a sort of policy nihilism where the magnitude of
the task seems too complex and too hard. Unfortunately, there is not
much one can do about this if the dimensions of disadvantage are
inextricably linked.’[^298]

Digital exclusion in remote Indigenous communities has been too often
left in the ‘too hard’ basket, alongside tasks that seem both more
urgent and incredibly complex. However, we think that there are
solutions to digital exclusion, and that, with time, the broader
benefits may begin to take the burden off other services attempting to
improve health and education. Our conclusion is therefore ultimately a
positive one: the digital divide in remote Australia can be gradually
closed, and there are clear strategies for addressing it. We now turn
our attention to some concrete policy approaches emerging from this
book.

<span id="_Toc318452859" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811703" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811502" class="anchor"></span></span></span>Conclusion: What Needs to Happen Next
==================================================================================================================================================================================

The digital divide that we have described in this book is not uniform or
easily quantifiable. At the risk of simplifying the situation, in this
final chapter we offer a plain-language summary of what we discovered,
and offer considerations for policy and programs.

As we have seen, vastly different rates of adoption are observable at
the regional and local levels: some communities have high rates of
adoption, while nearby communities are completely excluded. As
Indigenous households in many of these communities share a similar
socio-economic profile, we caution against drawing a direct causal link
between social exclusion and digital exclusion.

The strikingly uneven patterns of internet adoption between remote
communities correspond to the availability of mobile broadband and other
government programs. Public-private partnerships in some regions have
extended mobile coverage to larger remote communities. In addition,
various publicly-funded initiatives have provided a level of internet
access, including computer rooms and training provided through the
Northern Territory Libraries network and remote media organizations.
Such programs have been designed to assist Aboriginal people to discover
and learn about communication technology within community settings.
Community payphones, provided through the former Indigenous
Communications Program, are delivering internet to over 300 small
communities (with populations under 50 people). The expectation
underpinning such programs is that once people are given basic levels of
internet skills and experience, they will eventually acquire internet
services of their own accord. An unstated assumption is that those
living in nearby communities will eventually learn about and adopt
internet services through social network effects. However, this is not
necessarily the case.

For many in remote communities, internet adoption is not a linear
trajectory from non-use to use, but something that people will fall in
and out of when coverage and pre-paid credit permit. Affordability is an
issue, in that the relative value of internet ICTs is likely to
fluctuate depending on an individual’s life circumstances; for example,
when money is short, basics such as food, power and transport may take
priority rather than fixing a computer/device or paying for
subscriptions/data. Particular groups, including older people and those
living in small communities, can remain completely excluded, or only
experience the benefits of internet use through others (making them
users by proxy). Factors such as an individual’s mobility and avoidance
relationships can play a role in internet adoption, use and skills
transferral.

### Digital Choices and the National Broadband Network (NBN)

We set out to understand why digital exclusion is occurring in remote
Australia despite government efforts to equalize the cost of broadband
for all Australians regardless of where they live. We found that
Indigenous households are generally only acquiring broadband services
under certain conditions. Identifiable ‘digital choices’ are informed by
the practicalities and capacities of remote communities, and may be
compounded by social norms.

Households in remote communities are choosing not to acquire satellite
broadband services, preferring pre-paid mobile broadband in areas where
there is mobile coverage. The consumer preference for pre-paid billing,
as well as practical difficulties associated with satellite internet
connections, means that households are more likely to go without
internet than enter into satellite internet contracts. Our findings
suggest that policy objectives aimed at improving internet quality (such
as faster speeds), although desirable for services and businesses in
remote Australia, will not encourage residents of remote communities to
adopt broadband. In this book we have questioned whether satellite
internet – the Australian government’s response to internet access in
very remote areas – can meet the needs of remote communities under
current arrangements. However, changes to the way that satellite
internet is sold and supported could make a significant difference,
including enabling WiFi programs that provide residents with the payment
flexibility they require.

### The Tangible Outcomes of Internet Use

Many of the outstation residents believed there are benefits to being
online. Everyday uses such as online banking and shopping can provide a
significant level of agency and autonomy for individuals. Checking bank
balances and welfare payments emerged as one of the most popular uses of
the internet. Internet shopping, entertainment and staying in touch with
family via social networking were also common – made more significant
when we consider how difficult it can be for those living in remote
communities to undertake these activities through other means, given
their limited transport and telecommunication options. As very few
organizations or agencies attempted to use online communication to reach
the residents over the four-year period, we were unable to determine
whether internet access can reduce the costs of service provision to
outstations.[^299]

During the course of our research, cyber-bullying was reported within
some central Australian communities and towns. Older generations found
cyber-bullying and cyber-safety issues particularly challenging to
understand and address. Network-level filtering and terms of use that
reflect the specific concerns of elders and residents could be
implemented in conjunction with the installation of community WiFi
networks in remote communities and settlements (filtering is already
occurring where the APN’s satellite phones and WiFi are operating).

Developing digital proficiency in using social media and ICTs across
different age groups is also crucial to empowering remote community
members to manage these issues. Implementing policies that prevent or
discourage internet provision and access, as has occurred under the
Northern Territory Emergency Response in relation to the surveillance
and supervision of publicly-provided computers (2007-2012), is not a
viable or equitable solution to cyber-safety issues.

### Factors Influencing the Adoption of Paid Internet Services

If this particular divide is to be resolved, internet service providers
will need to investigate and implement more flexible and user-friendly
arrangements and administrative processes for satellite internet,
particularly in regard to installation and billing.

As discussed in Chapter 9, facilitating the application process for
NBNCo Interim Satellite Services (ISS) proved to be time intensive for
us. In our view, without such assistance, very few households in remote
Indigenous communities would manage to arrange NBN satellite services.
It is unrealistic to expect households to carry out the various steps
independently, given their limited access to telephones and knowledge of
the processes, combined with the NBNCo and (some) ISP staff’s
relatively-uninformed perceptions of remote community circumstances.

In particular, billing proved to be one of the biggest obstacles to
satellite internet services. Despite the willingness of some community
members to allocate a portion of household budgets to internet services,
navigating and managing the ISP’s billing mechanisms was difficult.
About half the computer owners struggled over the first six months to
maintain sufficient balances in their nominated bank accounts to support
the monthly payments when they became due, resulting in temporary or
permanent loss of internet access in some cases. For others, direct
debits of large, unexpected amounts occurred if bills had been unpaid in
previous months.

Our research in Ali Curung,[^300] a community with mobile coverage,
confirmed that people are prepared to pay for the internet if it suits
them. All interviewees who were paying for internet access were paying
for pre-paid mobile broadband, even though satellite internet was
available at cheaper rates.

### Shared Facilities Versus Home Internet

When we commenced the project, there was an assumption in policy and
academic analysis that shared facilities were the most appropriate form
of internet access for remote communities. In the intervening years,
government-funded and NGO programs (including Remote Indigenous Public
Internet Access (RIPIA), the community phones project, and work by
organizations such as the Central Australian Youth Link Up Service
(CAYLUS) have moved increasingly towards public WiFi.

A core focus of our work was whether home internet (the norm for
mainstream Australia) was viable, particularly for communities too small
to justify telecenters. We also tested shared, community-managed WiFi by
placing some computers in communal spaces (at the residents’ request),
and monitoring how they were shared and maintained. We considered
practical matters to do with housing, including living arrangements, the
condition of the houses and whether residents were home often enough to
want a permanent connection to the internet; documented how long PCs and
related electronics could withstand the heat, dust and vermin; and
assessed ownership patterns (both Western ownership and traditional
systems of demand sharing).

Although non-Indigenous people often associate a ‘caring and sharing’
ethic with Aboriginal culture, and therefore assume that shared or
communal internet facilities are most appropriate, we found that
individuals wanted to identify as the ‘owners’ of the computers. Access,
and by extension usage, was largely restricted to the
household/immediate family members, with the owner determining who could
use the PC. Avoidance relationships between families, and the emphasis
on discrete family ownership and use of ICT, resulted in certain family
groups often dominating access to computers in shared spaces and
excluding others, a finding that was corroborated at the telecenter at
Papunya. Location, access and usage are therefore important
considerations for remote Aboriginal owners.

These findings have implications in considering models for the provision
of ICT and internet access in remote communities. Specifically,
telecenter or ‘internet café’-type arrangements which are run by
Indigenous community members may not be the most suitable mechanism for
providing equitable access to the broader community, owing to family and
other cultural obligations (kinship). For example, in one of the larger
communities we visited, the death of a young man who had been
supervising a computer center meant that some others in that kinship
network were unwilling to use it.

While in theory the home computing model provided ICT access for the
whole family, ranging from grandparents to young, pre-school children,
the dynamics of inter-familial, gender and age relationships influenced
community members’ access to and use of the ICTs. The higher profile and
level of participation of women in the home computing model suggests
that locating computers and internet access within household spaces
might lead to a stronger association of digital technology with a
female-coded domain and technical activities, with positive flow-on
effects in facilitating greater ICT usage by women and children. By
contrast, at the Papunya telecenter, the main room became so closely
identified with young men that a separate space was created for women to
access computers and the internet. To ensure equitable ICT access, the
ways that different age, gender and family groups became aligned with
particular social spaces within remote Aboriginal contexts needs to be
considered in ICT planning.

Residents’ degree of mobility, both within and outside the community,
has implications for ICT provision in relation to access, ownership,
management of billing and sustainability. ICT arrangements need to be
flexible in response to residential mobility, and some devices and
equipment may be more suitable than others depending on community
members’ degree of mobility. For instance, residents moved houses within
the community for a range of reasons, including available housing stock,
maintenance issues in some houses, the cost of power, and cultural
customs surrounding death. Such inter-community mobility has
consequences for fixed infrastructure costs such as satellite dishes.

The high level of mobility does not necessarily equate to a preference
or requirement for mobile devices. PCs can be easier to manage in the
domestic setting. In contrast, there is a high degree of sharing of
mobile devices.

### Equitable IT Maintenance and Training Support

Much less sharing and helping occurred between households than we
anticipated, not only in relation to access and use, but in overcoming
ICT issues and sharing skills and knowledge. A critical mass of ICT
users and hardware is not sufficient to ameliorate the digital divide
without providing ICT support and training. The tendency towards
discrete family/household and even highly-personalized use, together
with the social and cultural relationships between different groups,
needs to be considered in providing ICT education and training to ensure
equity of access in remote communities.

Contrary to views that Aboriginal people prefer group learning because
they are communally-oriented, we found that community members generally
preferred learning opportunities that were flexible enough to
accommodate their lifestyle and priorities, and were provided within
their homes, often on an individual basis. Individual or home-based
learning is possibly also preferred as a way to avoid situations in
which their lack of skill is on display, leading to feelings of
embarrassment (shame). Although logistically challenging and resource
intensive, a flexible, opportunistic approach that tailors learning
opportunities to the individual’s needs and takes place within private,
safe spaces rather than formal, structured group learning is more likely
to be effective. These observations were supported by the experience of
Papunya Computer Room (PCR), which mostly offered one-on-one training in
response to the failure of attempts at group program delivery.

### Overcoming the Digital Divide

Digital exclusion in remote Australia should not be seen as an
intractable problem. In communities where satellite internet is the only
available internet, innovative solutions are still possible.

For instance, externally-maintained WiFi services that provide
satellite-delivered internet within communities are possible under
current regulatory and retail arrangements. Such services overcome the
need for a fixed connection to the home, resolving access for those who
may not reside in the community on a permanent basis, or where post-paid
billing is not feasible for households. Such services would need to be
managed by an intermediary organization or commercial enterprise with
experience working in remote communities. Sustainable models might
involve payment systems that enable people to pre-pay for data
allowances in advance (similar to hotel WiFi systems), covering service,
download and power costs.

### Knowing the Digital Divide

On a final note, our understanding of what we have called ‘internet on
the outstation’ developed over a long-term engagement with the
residents. It would not have been possible without an existing level of
trust between the Aboriginal organizations involved in the study (the
Centre for Appropriate Technology \[CAT\] and the Central Land Council
\[CLC\]), and the outstation elders and residents. Although there is
perhaps much we would do differently if we had the chance again, we hope
that other organizations may learn from our efforts as they continue to
develop programs with Indigenous communities.

At a more fundamental level, issues such as internet infrastructure,
affordability and programs are important, not just for the daily
communication activities of those who access these services, but for the
services, shires, schools and organizations that interact with
communities on an ongoing basis. Nurturing connections between these
groups and the organizations that are working at solving communication
barriers (such as the Australian Communications Consumer Action Network
and the Indigenous Remote Communications Association) is important, and
yet there are few resources to enable such collaboration and knowledge
exchange.[^301] As for research, on-the-ground experience is necessary
when it comes to understanding the digital divide. There is a serious
need for ongoing collection of data on remote community ICT
infrastructures, as well as basic consumer information including
expenditure, device preferences and sharing behaviours. However,
internet adoption and use is inherently tied to everyday practices,
priorities, needs and capacities. Only by understanding the social and
cultural aspects of life in remote communities can we begin to know the
nature of the divide and the tangible benefits of being online.

Postscript
----------

By early 2016, very few of the desktop computers were still being used
in the communities. The residents had not rushed to replace broken
machines, although the women we met with all continued to see value in
having the internet. 

At Imangara, both Emily's and Mary’s computers needed repairs. They were
paying for the internet, even though they could not use it, and were
planning on calling the internet service provider to get it suspended.
Louise was using her internet connection with her iPad, as her PC had
also died. 

Many of the computers had been moved out of Mungalawurru. Only the
middle-aged couple at Mungalawurru had kept the internet, which we were
told had become slow, either because of the NBN satellite connection, or
because their machine was getting old. The woman was paying her bills by
cheque now, an arrangement that suited her much better than direct
debit. Karen was still living in Tennant Creek, and was using the
internet on her husband's phone and on her daughter's iPad, as the
computer had finally stopped working.

The senior woman from Mungalawurru, who had been living and working in
town during the years we visited, told us that she plans to retire and
move back to the outstation. She was planning to get a computer for
herself at that time, and wanted more computers for the community. In
her opinion, the real value of having the internet is that her family
can look up histories and places, and document culture for young people
to learn. Although she described activities such as internet banking as
useful, she said they were just everyday needs, not ‘our way’.  

Rhonda’s time was taken up with working in Alice Springs, but her plans
to create stories for bilingual education for small children had
developed rather than diminished. She said she also hopes to produce
books on the wildlife at Tjoritja. She still had her computer and was
planning on getting an internet connection in the near future. Rhonda's
family were now making their own plans for enterprise at Kwale Kwale,
and her mother had recently purchased nine baby peacocks.  

Bibliography
============

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Committee. ‘Everybody's Business:
Remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Community Stores’, Canberra:
Commonwealth of Australia, 2009.

Altman, J.C., M.C. Dillon and K. Jordan. ‘Submission to the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Affairs Inquiry into Community Stores in Remote Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Communities’, *CAEPR Topical Issue No. 04/2009,*
Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2009.

Altman, J. ‘Development Options on Aboriginal Land: Sustainable
Indigenous Hybrid Economies in the Twenty-First Century’, in L. Taylor,
G. Ward, G. Henderson, R. Davis and L. Wallis (eds) *The Power of
Knowledge, the Resonance of Tradition*, Canberra: Aboriginal Studies
Press, 2005.

———. ‘A Genealogy of 'Demand Sharing': From Pure Anthropology to Public
Policy’, in Y. Musharbash and M. Barber (eds) *Ethnography and the
Production of Anthropological Knowledge: Essays in Honour of Nicolas
Peterson*, ANU E Press, 2011, pp. 187-200.

———. *In Search of an Outstations Policy for Indigenous Australians,*
Canberra: Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2006.

Amnesty International. *The Land Holds Us: Aboriginal Peoples' Right to
Traditional Homelands in the Northern Territory*, Broadway, NSW: Amnesty
International, 2011.

Ananny, M. ‘From Noxious to Public? Tracing Ethical Dynamics of Social
Media Platform Conversions’, *Social Media + Society* 1.1 (2015): 1-3.

Anderson, B. and K. Tracey. ‘Digital Living: The Impact (or Otherwise)
of the Internet on Everday British Life’ in C. Haythornthwaite and B.
Wellman (eds) *The Internet in Everyday Life*, Malden, MA, USA:
Blackwell Publishers Ltd, 2002, pp. 139-63.

ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation, ‘World
Internet Project (Australia)’,
[*http://www.cci.edu.au/projects/world-internet-project-australia*](http://www.cci.edu.au/projects/world-internet-project-australia).

Austin-Broos, D. *A Different Inequality: The Politics of Debate About
Remote Aboriginal Australia* \[Kindle Dx Version\], Sydney: Allen &
Unwin, 2011.

Australian Bureau of Statistics. ‘Australia, Remote and Very Remote
(Remotness Factor), Indigenous Profile, by Household’,
[*www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home*](http://www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home).

———. ‘Census of Population and Housing – Counts of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Peoples’,
[*http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/2075.0main+features32011*](http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/2075.0main+features32011).

———. ‘Housing and Infrastructure in Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Communities’,
[*http://www.abs.gov.au/Ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/4710.0Main%20Features42006?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=4710.0&issue=2006&num=&view*](http://www.abs.gov.au/Ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/4710.0Main%20Features42006?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=4710.0&issue=2006&num=&view).

———. ‘Macdonnel and Barkly Statistical Area 3, Indigenous Profile, by
Houshold’, www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home.

———. ‘Patterns of Internet Access in Australia’,
[*http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/8146.0.55.001/*](http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/8146.0.55.001/)[.]()

Australian Communications and Media Authority, ‘Communications Report
2009-10’,
[*http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/\_assets/main/lib311995/2009-10\_comms\_report-complete.pdf*](http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/_assets/main/lib311995/2009-10_comms_report-complete.pdf)[.]()

———. ‘Communications Report 2012-13’. Canberra: Commonwealth of
Australia, 2013.

———. ‘Cybersmart Parents: Connecting Parents to Cyber-Safety Resources’,
Canberra: Australian Media and Communications Authority, 2010.

———. ‘The Internet Service Market and Australians in the Online
Environment’, Canberra, 2011.

———. ‘Telecommunications in Remote Indigenous Communications’,
[*http://www.acma.gov.au/theACMA/telecommunications-in-remote-indigenous-communities*](http://www.acma.gov.au/theACMA/telecommunications-in-remote-indigenous-communities).

Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform Association. ‘Atm
Fees in Indigenous Communities’, *AFCCRA*,
[*http://www.afccra.org/media%20releases%20documents/ATM%20Fees%20in%20Remote%20Indigenous%20Communities.pdf*](http://www.afccra.org/media%20releases%20documents/ATM%20Fees%20in%20Remote%20Indigenous%20Communities.pdf).

Australian Private Networks. *Indigenous Communications Program: Final
Report*. 2014.

Balogh, M. ‘Indigenous Australia Addicted to Facebook’, news release, 26
August 2014.

Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo. ‘Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the
Way to Fight Global Poverty’, *Population and Development Review* 374
(2011): 796-97.

Bath, J. and N. Biddle. ‘Measures of Indigenous Wellbeing and Their
Determinants across the Lifecourse’, CAEPR Lecture Series, ANU Centre
for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2011.

Battiste, M. *Indigenous Knowledge and Pedagogy in First Nations
Education: A Literature Review with Recommendations*, Ottawa: Apamuwek
Institute, 2002.

Batty, P. *Governing Cultural Difference: The Incorporation of the
Aboriginal Subject into the Mechanisms of Government with Reference to
the Development of Aboriginal Radio and Television in Central
Australia*, PhD diss., University of South Australia, Adelaide, 2003.

Beadman, B. ‘“A Tortuous Trail”: Bob Beadman's Short History of
Outstations’, *Alice Online: Australia from the inside out...*,
[*http://aliceonline.com.au/2011/10/17/a-tortuous-trail-bob-beadmans-short-history-of-outstations/*](http://aliceonline.com.au/2011/10/17/a-tortuous-trail-bob-beadmans-short-history-of-outstations/).

Bell, D. *Daughters of the Dreaming*, Melbourne: Allen and Unwin, 1983.

Best, M.L. and C.M. Maclay. ‘Community Internet Access in Rural Areas:
Solving the Economic Sustainability Puzzle’ in G.S. Kirkman, P.K.
Cornelius, J.D. Sachs and K. Schwab (eds) *The Global Information
Technology Report: Readiness for the Networked World*, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002, pp. 76-89.

Biddle, N. ‘Income’, Paper 11: *CAEPR Indigenous Population Project 2011
Census Papers,* Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy
Research, 2013.

Blanchard, C.A. *Return to Country: The Aboriginal Homelands Movement in
Australia*. Canberra: The House of Representatives Standing Comittee on
Aboriginal Affairs, 1987.

Brady, F.R., L.E. Dyson and T. Asela. *Indigenous Adoption of Mobile
Phones and Oral Culture*, Cultural Attitudes Towards Communication and
Technology, Perth: Murdoch University, 2008.

Brady, F., L.E. Dyson and Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council, *Report
to Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council on Mobile Technology in the
Bloomfield River Valley*, 2009.

Brasche, I. and I. Harrington. ‘Promoting Teacher Quality and
Continuity: Tackling the Disadvantages of Remote Indigenous Schools in
the Northern Territory’, *Australian Journal of Education* 56.2 (2012):
110-25.

Broadband for the Bush Alliance. *Rethinking the Indigenous
Communications Program,* policy paper, 2013.

Brown, S. A., V. Venkatesh and H. Bala. ‘Household Technology Use:
Integrating Household Life Cycle and the Model of Adoption of Technology
in Households’, *The Information Society* 22.4 (2006): 205-18.

Byrnes, J. ‘Aboriginal Learning Styles and Adult Education: Is a
Synthesis Possible’, *Australian Journal of Adult and Community
Education* 33.3 (1993): 157-71.

Carlson, B. ‘The “New Frontier”: Emergent Indigenous Identities and
Social Media’ in M. Harris, M. Nakata and B. Carlson (eds) *The Politics
of Identity: Emerging Indigeneity*, Sydney: University of Technology
Sydney E-Press, 2013, pp. 147-168.

Central Australian Youth Link Up Service. ‘Annual Attendance Trends
Data: July’, 2010.

———. ‘Papunya Computer Room’,
[*http://caylus.org.au/papunya-computer-room/*](http://caylus.org.au/papunya-computer-room/).

———. ‘Proposal Re: Better Way of Providing Broadband in Remote
Communities’, Alice Springs: Tangentyere Council, 2014.

Central Land Council (CLC). ‘Divas Chat Causing Social Chaos’, *Land
Rights News,* Alice Springs: Central Land Council, 2012, pp. 4-6

Chakravartty, P. ‘Rebranding Development Communications in Emergent
India’, *Nordicom Review* 33 (Special Issue) (2012): 65-76.

Coalition. ‘The Coalition's Policy for E-Government and the Digital
Economy’, Canberra, 2013.

Commonwealth of Australia. ‘Budget Paper No. 2: Expense Measures: A New
Remote Indigenous Housing Strategy’,
[*http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/bp2/html/bp2\_expense-19.htm*](http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/bp2/html/bp2_expense-19.htm).

———. ‘Budget: Indigenous Partnerships’,
[*http://www.budget.gov.au/2005-06/ministerial/html/dotars-12.htm*](http://www.budget.gov.au/2005-06/ministerial/html/dotars-12.htm).

Corner, S. ‘Universal Telecommunications Services: A Brief History and
Analysis of the Issues Surrounding the New Australian Legislation on the
Universal Service Obligation’, *Telecommunications Journal of Australia*
62.2 (2012).

Correa, T. and I. Pavez. *Digital Inclusion in Rural Areas: A
Qualitative Exploration of Challenges Faced by People from Isolated
Comunities*, International Communications Association Conference, San
Juan, 2015.

Cowlishaw, G. ‘Infanticide in Aboriginal Australia’, *Oceania* (1978):
262-83.

———. ‘A New Protection Policy?’, *Inside Story*, 2013,
[*http://insidestory.org.au/a-new-protection-policy/*](http://insidestory.org.au/a-new-protection-policy/).

———. ‘Socialization and Subordination among Australian Aborigines’,
*Man* (1982): 492-507.

———. *Women's Realm: A Study of Socialization, Sexuality and
Reproduction among Australian Aborigines*, PhD diss., University of
Sydney, Sydney, 1979.

Crouch, A. ‘The Community Phone Project: An Overview’, *DKCRC Working
Paper 46*, Alice Springs: Desert Knowledge CRC, 2009.

———. ‘Home Internet for Remote Indigenous Communities: Technical
Report’, Alice Springs: Centre for Appropriate Technology, 2014.

Crump, B. and A. McIlroy. ‘The Digital Divide: Why the "Don't-Want-Tos"
Won't Compute: Lessons from a New Zealand ICT Project’, *First Monday*
8.12 (2003).

Daly, A.E. ‘Bridging the Digital Divide: The Role of Community Online
Access Centres in Indigenous Communities’, Canberra: *ANU Centre for
Aboriginal Economic Policy Research,* 2005.

Davenport, W.H. ‘Two Kinds of Value in the Eastern Solomon Islands’, in
A. Appadurai (ed) *The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural
Perspective*, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1986, pp. 95-109.

Davies, S. *Urban Based Support for Rural and Remote Australian
Telecommunications*, Broadband for the Bush Alliance, 2014.

DiMaggio, P. and E. Hargittai. ‘From the “Digital Divide” to “Digital
Inequality”: Studying Internet Use as Penetration Increases’, Working
Paper 15, *Center for Arts and Cultural Policy Studies,* Princeton
University, 2001.

‘DIY Telecoms’. *The Economist*,
[*http://www.economist.com/news/technology-quarterly/21645498-fed-up-failings-big-operators-remote-mexican-communities-are-acting*](http://www.economist.com/news/technology-quarterly/21645498-fed-up-failings-big-operators-remote-mexican-communities-are-acting).

Donovan, M. ‘Is It a Digital Divide Because It’s No Good When Talking
from an Aboriginal Point? Giving Aboriginal Design to Educational
Practices’,
[*http://www.persons.org.uk/ci/mm/nmtc/nmtc2/donovan%20paper.pdf*](http://www.persons.org.uk/ci/mm/nmtc/nmtc2/donovan%20paper.pdf).

———. ‘Can Information Communication Technological Tools Be Used to Suit
Aboriginal Learning Pedagogies’, *Information technology and Indigenous
people* (2007): 93-104.

Doron, A. and R. Jeffrey. *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2013.

Dutton, W.H., A. Shepherd and C. Di Gennaro. ‘Digital Divides and
Choices Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns of
Internet Diffusion and Use’, in B. Anderson, M. Brynin, Y. Raban and J.
Gershuny (eds) *Information and Communication Technologies in Society
E-Living in a Digital Europe*,London: Routledge, 2007, pp. 31-45.

Dyson, L.E. ‘Design for a Culturally Affirming Indigenous Computer
Literacy Course’, 2002.

Eady, M. and S. Woodcock. ‘Understanding the Need: Using Collaboratively
Created Draft Guiding Principles to Direct Online Synchronous Learning
in Indigenous Communities’, *International Journal for Educational
Integrity* 6.2 (2010): 24-40.

Earl, P.E. ‘Economics and Psychology: A Survey’, *The Economic Journal*
100.402 (1990): 718-755.

Ellen, R. and R. Herrick. ‘John Elferink Dismisses Idea for Free Wi-Fi
in Alice Springs Town Camps to Reduce Youth Crime’, *ABC News*,
[*http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-10/elferink-dismisses-wi-fi-idea-for-alice-springs-town-camps/6384214*](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-10/elferink-dismisses-wi-fi-idea-for-alice-springs-town-camps/6384214).

Elliot, C. ‘Social Death and Disenfranchised Grief: An Alyawarr Case
Study’ in K. Glaskin (ed) *Mortality, Mourning and Mortuary Practices in
Indigenous Australia*, London: Ashgate Publishing, 2008, pp. 103-20.

Enghel, F. and K. Wilkins. ‘Communication, Media and Development:
Problems and Perspectives’, *Nordicom Review* 33 (Special Issue) (2012).

Ewing, S. and J. Thomas. *The Internet in Australia*. Brisbane: ARC
Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation, Queensland
University of Technology, 2010.

Fairlie, R.W., Beltran, D.O. and Das, K.K., ‘Home Computers and Educational Outcomes: Evidence from the Nlsy97 and Cps*’, *Economic Inquiry* 48.3 (2010).

Featherstone, D. ‘The Aboriginal Invention of Broadband: How Yarnangu
Are Using ICTs in the Ngaanyatjarra Lands of Western Australia’ in L.
Ormond-Parker, A. Corn, C. Fforde, K. Obata and S. O’Sullivan (eds)
*Information Technologies and Indigenous Communities*, Canberra: AIATSIS
Research Publications, 2013, pp. 27-52.

J. Finlayson, and A.J. Auld. ‘Shoe or Stew?: Balancing Wants and Needs
in Indigenous Households: A Study of Appropriate Income Support Payments
and Policies for Families’, *CAEPR Discussion Paper No. 182*, Canberra:
ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 1999.

Fitzgerald, L. ‘New 3g Network Falls Short for Stations and Communities
near Barrow Creek, Northern Territory’,
[*http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-08-25/barrow-creek-3g-network-lacking/5693386*](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-08-25/barrow-creek-3g-network-lacking/5693386).

Fletcher, P. ‘Speech to the ACCAN USO Forum’,
[*http://paulfletcher.com.au/speeches/portfolio-speeches/item/1316-speech-to-the-accan-uso-forum.html*](http://paulfletcher.com.au/speeches/portfolio-speeches/item/1316-speech-to-the-accan-uso-forum.html).

Fogarty, W. *‘You Got Any Truck?’ Vehicles and Decentralised Mobile
Service-Provision in Remote Indigenous Australia*. Canberra: ANU Centre
for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2005.

(‘Free Wi-Fi in Town Camps Could Solve Anti-Social Youth Problem in
Alice Springs, Says Caylus’),
[*http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-08/free-wifi-in-alice-springs-town-camps-could-solve-youth-problems/6378914*](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-08/free-wifi-in-alice-springs-town-camps-could-solve-youth-problems/6378914)[.]()

Galperin, H. and J. Mariscal. ‘Digital Poverty: Latin American and
Caribbean Perspectives’, *Practical Publishing*,
[*http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Resources/Publications/openebooks/342-3/index.html*](http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Resources/Publications/openebooks/342-3/index.html).

Galperin, H. and F. Bar. ‘The Microtelco Opportunity: Evidence from
Latin America’, *Information Technologies & International Development*
3.2 (2006): 73-86.

Ginsburg, F. ‘Rethinking the Digital Age’ in D. Hesmondhalgh and J.
Toynbee (eds) *The Media and Social Theory,* New York: Routledge, 2008:
127-44.

Godinho, *V. Money, Financial Capability and Well-Being in Indigenous
Australia*, PhD diss., Graduate School of Business and Law, RMIT
University, Melbourne, 2014.

Goggin, G. and J. Clark. ‘Mobile Phones and Community Development: A
Contact Zone between Media and Citizenship’, *Development in Practice*
19.4-5 (2009): 585-597.

Goolsbee, A. and P.J. Klenow. ‘Evidence on Learning and Network
Externalities in the Diffusion of Home Computers’, *Journal of Law and
Economics* 45.2 (2002): 317-343.

Granovetter, M.S. ‘The Strength of Weak Ties’, *American Journal of
Sociology* (1973): 1360-1380.

Green, L.D. Brady, K. Olafsson, J. Hartley and C. Lumby. ‘Risks and
Safety for Australian Children on the Internet: Full Findings from the
AU Kids Online Survey of 9-16 Year Olds and Their Parents’, *Cultural
Science Journal* 4.1 (2011): 1-73.

Grey-Gardner, R. and M. Young. *Utopia Homelands Project: Lessons from
Experience*. Centre for Appropriate Technology, Urapuntja Aboriginal
Corporation and the Australian Government Department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet, 2014.

Grissmer, D.W., R.F. Subotnik and M. Orland. *A Guide to Incorporating
Multiple Methods in Randomized Controlled Trials to Assess Intervention
Effects*, Washington, DC: American Psychological Association*,* 2009.

Hamilton, A. ‘A Complex Strategical Situation: Gender and Power in
Aboriginal Australia’ in N. Grieve and P. Grimshaw (eds) *Australian
Imjmen: Feminist Perspectives*, Melbourne: Oxford University Press,
1981, pp. 69-85.

Harris, S. and J. Kinslow-Harris. *Culture and Learning: Tradition and
Education in North-East Arnhem Land*, Canberra: Australian Institute of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, 1980.

Harrison, N. *Teaching and Learning in Aboriginal Education*, Melbourne:
Oxford University Press, 2011.

Hartley, J. and J. Potts. *Cultural Science: A Natural History of
Stories, Demes, Knowledge and Innovation*. London: Bloomsbury
Publishing, 2014.

Hartley, J. and E. Rennie. ‘Show Business for Ugly people? Media
Politics and E-Democracy’, Australian Electronic Governance Conference,
Melbourne, 14-15 April 2004.

Hatt, T., K. Okeleke and M. Meloan. ‘Closing the Coverage Gap - a View
from Asia’, *GSMA Intelligence*,
[*https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=e245c423854fcfd38eeae0a918cc91c8&download*](https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=e245c423854fcfd38eeae0a918cc91c8&download).

Helsper, E. *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage and
the Information Society*. Department for Communities and Local
Government, 2008.

———. ‘A Corresponding Fields Model for the Links between Social and
Digital Exclusion’, *Communication Theory* 22.4 (2012): 403-426.

Helsper, E., A. van Deursen and R. Eynon. *Tangible Outcomes of Internet
Use: From Digital Skills to Tangible Outcomes Project Report*, Oxford
Internet Institute, University of Twente and London School of Economics
and Political Science, 2015.

Hems, L., C. Connolly, and M. Georgouras. ‘Measuring Financial Exclusion
in Australia’, Centre for Social Impact (CSI), University of New South
Wales, for National Australia Bank, 2012.

Hiatt, L. ‘Traditional Attitudes to Land Resources’ in R. M. Berndt (ed)
*Aboriginal Sites: Rites and Resource Development*, Perth: University of
Western Australia Press, 1982, pp. 47-53.

Hilbert, M. ‘The End Justifies the Definition: The Manifold Outlooks on
the Digital Divide and Their Practical Usefulness for Policy-Making’,
*Telecommunications Policy* 35.8 (2011): 715-736.

Hinkson, M. ‘What's in a Dedication? On Being a Warlpiri DJ’, *The
Australian Journal of Anthropology* 15.2 (2004): 143-162.

Hogan, E. ‘Beyond the Mulga Curtain’, 2014,
insidestory.org.au/behind-the-mulga-curtain.

Hogan, E. ‘Gender and ICT access in remote central Australian Aboriginal contexts’, Australian Aboriginal Studies, 2016.1 (2016).

Hogan, E., E. Rennie, A. Crouch, A. Wright, R. Gregory and J. Thomas.
‘Submission to the Inquiry into Issues Surrounding Cyber-Safety for
Indigenous Australians’, Brisbane: ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative
Industries and Innovation, Queensland University of Technology, 2013.

Howard, S. and E. Rennie. ‘Free for All: A Case Study Examining
Implementation Factors of One-to-One Device Programs’, *Computers in the
Schools* 30.4 (2013): 359-377.

Hughes, H. *Lands of Shame: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
'Homelands' in Transition*. Sydney: Centre for Independent Studies,
2007.

Hughes, H. and M. Hughes. *Indigenous Education 2012*. Sydney: Centre
for Independent Studies, 2012.

Hughes, P. and A.J. More. *Aboriginal Ways of Learning*. Adelaide: Paul
Hughes, 2004.

———. ‘Aboriginal Ways of Learning and Learning Styles’, Brisbane:
*Australian Association for Research in Education*, 1997.

Human Rights Equal Opportunity Commission. *Social Justice Report 2011*,
Sydney: Commonwealth of Australia, 2011.

Hunter, B. ‘Indigenous Social Exclusion: Insights and Challenges for the
Concept of Social Inclusion’, *Family Matters*, no. 82 (2009): 52.

Huyer, S. and T. Sikoska. ‘Overcoming the Gender Digital Divide:
Understanding ICTs and Their Potential for the Empowerment of Women’,
INSTRAW Research Paper Series No. 1, 2003.

Indigenous Housing and Infrastructure Branch of the Department of Family
and Community Services. *Review of the National Homelands Policy: Stage
One*. Alice Springs: Centre for Appropriate Technology, 2004.

Introna, L.D., and H. Nissenbaum. ‘Shaping the Web: Why the Politics of
Search Engines Matters’, *The Information Society* 16.3 (2000): 169-185.

Iten, L. *Cyber Safety Program Report*. Alice Springs: Northern
Territory Library and Central Australian Youth Link Up Service, 2014.

Ito, M., J. Antin, M. Finn, A. Law, A. Manion, S. Mitnick, D.
Schlossberg, S. Yardi and H. A. Horst, *Hanging out, Messing around, and
Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with New Media*, Cambridge, MA:
MIT press, 2009.

Johns, G. *No Job No House: An Economically Strategic Approach to Remote
Aboriginal Housing*. Canberra: The Menzies Research Centre, 2009.

Joint Select Committee on Cyber-Safety. ‘High-Wire Act: Cyber-Safety and
the Young’, *Interim Report*, Canberra, 2011.

Kaberry, P. M. *Aboriginal Women*. London: George Routledge and Sons Pty
Ltd, 1939.

Keen, I. ‘The Interpretation of Aboriginal “Property” on the Australian
Colonial Frontier’ in I. Keen (ed) *Aboriginal Participation in
Australian Economies: Historical and Anthropological Perspectives*,
Canberra:: ANU Press, 2010.

Kerins, S. ‘The First-Ever Northern Territory Homelands/Outstations
Policy’, *CAEPR Topical Issue No. 09/2009*, Canberra: ANU Centre for
Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2009.

Kowal, E. ‘Is Culture the Problem or the Solution? Outstation Health and
the Politics of Remoteness’ in J. Altman and M. Hinkson (eds) *Culture
Crisis: Anthropology and Politics in Aboriginal Australia*, Sydney:
University of New South Wales Press, 2010, pp. 253-276.

Kraemer, K. L., J. Dedrick and P. Sharma. ‘One Laptop Per Child: Vision
Vs. Reality’, *Communications of the ACM* 52.6 (2009): 66-73.

Kral, I. *Plugged In: Remote Australian Indigenous Youth and Digital
Culture,* Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research,
2010.

———. ‘Youth Media as Cultural Practice: Remote Indigenous Youth Speaking
out Loud’, *Australian Aboriginal Studies*, 1 (2011): 4-16.

Kral, I. and I. Falk. *What Is All That Learning For? Indigenous Adult
English Literacy Practices, Training, Community Capacity and Health*,
Adelaide: NCVER, 2004.

Lattas, A. and B. Morris. ‘The Politics of Suffering and the Politics of
Anthropology’ in J. Altman and M. Hinkson (eds) *Culture Crisis:
Anthropology and Politics in Aboriginal Australia*, Sydney: University
of New South Wales Press, 2010, pp. 97-133.

Lenovo. ‘TBR Quality Project’,
[*http://www.partnerinfo.lenovo.com/partners/us/products/downloads/thinkcentre-mseries/TBR-Quality-Study-ExecSummary.pdf*](http://www.partnerinfo.lenovo.com/partners/us/products/downloads/thinkcentre-mseries/TBR-Quality-Study-ExecSummary.pdf).

Liston, G. ‘Remote Community Hopes to Erect Giant Neon Crucifix’, *ABC
News,*
[*http://www.abc.net.au/news/2008-09-25/fiery-debate-over-dpp-decision/521100*](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2008-09-25/fiery-debate-over-dpp-decision/521100).

Livingstone, S. and L. Haddon. *Eu Kids Online: Final Report*. London:
EU Kids Online, 2009.

Livingstone, S. ‘Taking Risky Opportunities in Youthful Content
Creation: Teenagers' Use of Social Networking Sites for Intimacy,
Privacy and Self-Expression’, *New Media & Society* 10.3 (2008):
393-411.

Livingstone, S. and E. Helsper. ‘Gradations in Digital Inclusion:
Children, Young People and the Digital Divide’, *New Media & Society*
9.4 (2007): 671-696.

Loewenstein, G. and S. Issacharoff. ‘Source Dependence in the Valuation
of Objects’, *Journal of Behavioral Decision Making* 7.3 (1994):
157-168.

Lydon, J. ‘Our Sense of Beauty’: Visuality, Space and Gender on
Victoria’s Aboriginal Reserves, South‐Eastern Australia’, *History and
Anthropology* 16.2 (2005): 211-233.

Macdonald, G. ‘Economies and Personhood: Demand Sharing among the
Wiradjuri of New South Wales’ in G. Wenzel, G. Hovelsrud-Broda and N.
Kishigami (eds) *The Social Economy of Sharing: Resource Allocation and
Modern Hunter-Gatherers*, Osaka: National Museum of Ethnology, 2000, pp.
87-111.

Mahon, A. ‘Deadly Dreaming: Bi-Cultural Strategies for Working with
Indigenous Adults in Education’, Australian Council for Adult Literacy
conference, Surfers Paradise, Australia, 3-4 October, 2008,
[*http://www.acal.edu.au/conference/08/Deadly\_Dreaming\_Mahon.pdf*](http://www.acal.edu.au/conference/08/Deadly_Dreaming_Mahon.pdf).

Malin, M. and D. Maidment. ‘Evaluation of Irrkerlantye Learning Centre’,
unpublished report, Darwin: Cooperative Research Centre for Aboriginal
and Tropical Health, 2003.

Mares, P. ‘Homeland Security: Nt Indigenous Affairs Minister Outlines
Policy’, *ABC News,*
*http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/nationalinterest/homeland-security-nt-indigenous-affairs-minister/3147812\#transcript*.

Mayne, A. *Alternative Interventions. Aboriginal Homelands, Outback
Australia and the Centre for Appropriate Technology*, Adelaide:
Wakefield Press, 2014.

Mazzarella, W. ‘Beautiful Balloon: The Digital Divide and the Charisma
of New Media in India’, *American Ethnologist* 374 (2010): 783-804.

McCallum, K. and F. Papandrea. ‘Community Business: The Internet in
Remote Australian Indigenous Communities’, *New Media & Society* (2009):
1230-1251.

McElhinney, S. ‘Telecommunications Liberalisation and the Quest for
Universal Service in Australia’, *Telecommunications Policy* 25.4
(2001): 233-248.

McGregor, R. *Indifferent Inclusion: Aboriginal People and the
Australian Nation*. Canberra: Canberra Aboriginal Studies Press, 2011.

Merlan, F. ‘Gender in Aboriginal Society: A Review’, in R.M. Berndt and
R. Tonkinson (eds) *Social Anthropology and Australian Aboriginal
Studies*, Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press, 1988, pp. 15-76.

Michaels, E. *The Aboriginal Invention of Television in Central
Australia, 1982-1986: Report of the Fellowship to Assess the Impact of
Television in Remote Aboriginal Communities*, Canberra: Australian
Institute of Aboriginal Studies, 1986.

———. *Bad Aboriginal Art and Other Essays: Tradition, Media, and
Technological Horizons*. Vol. 3, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1994.

Miller, D. and H.A. Horst. ‘The Digital and the Human: A Prospectus for
Digital Anthropology’ in H. A. Horst and D. Miller (eds) *Digital
Anthropology*, London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2013, pp. 3-35.

Moran, M. ‘The Viability of 'Hub' Settlements’, *Dialogue* 29.1 (2010):
38-51.

Morsillo, R. ‘Affordable Broadband for All Australians’,
*Telecommunications Journal of Australia* 62.5 (2012): 78.1-78.16.

Musharbash, Y. ‘”Only Whitefella Take That Road”: Culture Seen through
the Intervention at Yuendumu’, in Hinkson (eds) *Culture Crisis:
Anthropology and Politics in Aboriginal Australia*, Sydney: University
of New South Wales Press, 2010, pp. 302-318.

———. *Yuendumu Everyday: Contemporary Life in Remote Aboriginal
Australia*. Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press, 2009.

Myers, F. ‘Burning the Truck and Holding the Country: Pintupi Forms of
Property and Identity’, in E.N. Wilmsen (eds) *We Are Here: Politics of
Aboriginal Land Tenure*, Los Angeles: University of California Press,
1989, pp. 15-42.

———. ‘Introduction: The Empire of Things’, in F. Myers (ed) *The Empire
of Things: Regimes of Value and Material Culture*, Santa Fe: School of
American Research Press, 2001, pp. 3-64.

———. *Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self: Sentiment, Place and Politics among
Western Desert Aborigines*. Berkeley, Los Angeles and Longon: University
of California Press, 1986.

———. *Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self: Sentiment, Place, and Politics
among Western Desert Aborigines*, Washington DC: Smithsonian Institute,
1986.

———. ‘Place, Identity and Exchange in a Totemic System: Nurturance and
the Process of Social Reproduction in Pintupi Society’, in J. Fajans
(ed) *Exchanging Products: Producing Exchange*, Sydney: University of
Sydney, 1993, pp. 3-57.

———. ‘Some Properties of Culture and Persons’, in R. A. Ghosh (ed)
*Code: Collaborative Ownership and the Digital Economy*, Cambridge:
London: MIT Press, 2005, pp. 45-60.

Nafus, D. and J. Sherman. ‘Big Data, Big Questions: This One Does Not Go
up to 11: The Quantified Self Movement as an Alternative Big Data
Practice’, *International Journal of Communication* 8 (2014): 11.

Nicholls, A.V. *The Social Life of the Computer in Ramingining,* Darwin:
Charles Darwin University, 2009.

Nobbs, C. ‘Ara Irititja: Protecting the Past, Accessing the Future:
Indigenous Memories in a Digital Age’, *Artlink* 24.1 (2004): 50-51.

Norris, P. *The Worldwide Digital Divide.* Annual Meeting of the
Political Studies Association of the UK, London School of Economics and
Political Science, 10-13 April 2000.

Norris and Pippa, ‘The Worldwide Digital Divide’, Annual Meeting of the Political Studies Association of the UK, London School of Economics and Political Science, 2000.

Northern Territory Department of Education. *Learning Lessons: An
Independent Review of Indigenous Education in the Northern Territory*,
Darwin: Northern Territory Department of Education, 1999,
[*http://www.education.nt.gov.au/\_\_data/assets/pdf\_file/0005/7475/learning\_lessons\_review.pdf*](http://www.education.nt.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/7475/learning_lessons_review.pdf)

———. ‘Enrolment and Attendance Statistics’,
[*http://www.education.nt.gov.au/students/at-school/enrolment-attendance/enrolment-attendance-statistics/2013-enrolment-and-attendance-statistics*](http://www.education.nt.gov.au/students/at-school/enrolment-attendance/enrolment-attendance-statistics/2013-enrolment-and-attendance-statistics)

Northern Territory Government Department of Corporate and Information
Services, Submission to the Regional Telecommunications Independent
Review Committee, 2015,
[*https://www.communications.gov.au/sites/g/files/net301/f/Northern%20Territory%20Government%20-%20Public%20Submission%20RTIRC%202015.pdf*](https://www.communications.gov.au/sites/g/files/net301/f/Northern%20Territory%20Government%20-%20Public%20Submission%20RTIRC%202015.pdf)

Nussbaum, M. ‘Capabilities as Fundamental Entitlements: Sen and Social
Justice’, *Feminist Economics* 9.2-3 (2003): 33-59.

O'Connell, J.F. ‘Room to Move: Contemporary Alyawara Settlement Patterns
and Their Implications for Aboriginal Housing Policy’ in M. Heppell (ed)
*A Black Reality: Aboriginal Camps and Housing in Remote Australia*,
Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, 1979, pp. 97-120.

Olsen, P. ‘Teenagers Say Goodbye to Facebook and Hello to Messenger
Apps’, *The Guardian*, 10 November 2013.

L. Ormond-Parker, A. Corn, K. Obata and S. O'Sullivan, (eds).
*Information Technology and Indigenous Communities,* AIATSIS National
Indigenous Studies Conference, 2009 and Information Technologies and
Indigenous Communities Symposium, 2010, Canberra: AIATSIS, 2013.

Pearce, K.E. and R.E. Rice. ‘Digital Divides from Access to Activities:
Comparing Mobile and Personal Computer Internet Users’, *Journal of
Communication* 63.4 (2013): 721-744.

Pearson, N. *Radical Hope: Education and Equality in Australia.*
Melbourne: Schwartz Publishing, 2011.

Peter Farr Consultants Australasia. *Connecting Our Communities:
Sustainable Networking Strategies for Australian Remote Indigenous
Communities*, Canberra: Department of Communications Information
Technology and the Arts, 2003.

Peterson, N. ‘Demand Sharing: Reciprocity and the Pressure for
Generosity among Foragers’, *American Anthropologist* 95.4 (1993):
860-874.

Pierce, J.L., T. Kostova and K.T. Dirks. ‘The State of Psychological
Ownership: Integrating and Extending a Century of Research’, *Review of
General Psychology* 7.1 (2003): 84.

Raiche, H. *Universal Communications in a Broadband World: Working
Paper,* Inaugural Australian Communications Consumer Action Network
(ACCAN) Conference, Melbourne, 2010.

Razak, I. ‘Telstra Accused of Ripping Off Aborigines’, *ABC News*,
[*http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2009/09/09/2680645*](http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2009/09/09/2680645)

Regional Telecommunications Independent Review Committee. *Regional
Telecommunications Review 2015: Unlocking the Potential in Regional
Australia*, Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia, 2015.

Regional Telecommunications Inquiry. *Connecting Regional Australia*,
Canberra: Department of Communications, Information Technology and the
Arts, 2002.

Renfrew, C. ‘Varna and the Emergence of Wealth in Prehistoric Europe’ in
A. Appadurai (ed) *The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural
Perspective*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988, 141-168.

Rennie, E. ‘Internet on the Outstation’, *Inside Story,* 9 May 2011,
[*http://insidestory.org.au/internet-on-the-outstation*](http://insidestory.org.au/internet-on-the-outstation)

Rennie, E., A. Crouch, J. Thomas and P. Taylor. ‘Beyond public access?
Reconsidering broadband for remote Indigenous communities’,
*Communication, Politics and Culture* 43.1 (2010): 48-69.

Rennie, E., A. Crouch, A. Wright and J. Thomas. ‘Home Internet for
Remote Indigenous Communities’, *Australian Communications Consumer
Action Network*, 2011.

———. ‘At home on the outstation: barriers to home internet in remote
Indigenous communities’, *Telecommunications Policy* 37.6 (2013):
583–593.

Rennie, E. and J. Potts. ‘Auction Subsidies and the Universal Service
Obligation: The Case for Remote Indigenous Communities’, Submission to
the Regional Telecommunications Independent Review (RTIRC), 2015.

Rennie, E., A. Crouch, J. Thomas and P. Taylor. ‘Beyond Public Access?
Reconsidering Broadband for Remote Indigenous Communities’*,
Communication, Politics & Culture* 43.1 (2010): 48-69.

Rennie, E. and J. Hartley. *The Story So Far Digital Storytelling,
Narrative and the New Literacy.* Image, Text and Sound Conference,
School of Creative Media, RMIT, Melbourne 2004.

Rhizomatica. ‘About.’
[*http://rhizomatica.org/about-2/*](http://rhizomatica.org/about-2/).

Robinson, G. ‘Families, Generations, and Self: Conflict, Loyalty, and
Recognition in an Australian Aboriginal Society’, *Ethos* 25.3 (1997):
303-332.

Robinson, J.A., and R.M. Nichol. ‘Building Bridges between Aboriginal
and Western Mathematics: Creating an Effective Mathematics Learning
Environment’, *Education in Rural Australia* 8.2 (1998): 9-17.

Rogers, E.M. *Diffusion of Innovations*. 5th ed, New York: Free Press,
2003.

Rowse, T, 'Re-figuring "Indigenous culture"' in J. Altman and M. Hinkson
(eds) *Culture crisis: anthropology and politics in aboriginal
Australia*, Kensington: UNSW Press, 2010, pp. 153-78.

Sanders, W. *Working Future: A Critique of Policy by Numbers*, Canberra:
Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2010.

Sandvig, C. ‘The Internet as an Infrastructure’, *The Oxford Handbook of
Internet Studies,* 2013*,* 86-108.

Sansom, B. *The Camp at Wallaby Cross: Aboriginal Fringe Dwellers in
Darwin*. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, 1980.

Schwab, R.G. *The Calculus of Reciprocity: Principles and Implications
of Aboriginal Sharing*. Canberra: Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy
Research, 1995.

Seemann, K.W., M. Parnell, S. McFallan and S. Tucker. *Housing for
Livelihoods: The Lifecycle of Housing and Infrastructure through a
Whole-of-System Approach in Remote Aboriginal Settlements*, Vol. 29,
Alice Springs: Desert Knowledge CRC, 2008.

Selwyn, N. ‘Reconsidering Political and Popular Understandings of the
Digital Divide’, *New Media & Society* 6.3 (2004): 341-362.

Selwyn, N., S. Gorard and J. Furlong. ‘Whose Internet Is It Anyway?
Exploring Adults’ (Non) Use of the Internet in Everyday Life’, *European
Journal of Communication* 20.1 (2005): 5-26.

Sen, A. *Social Exclusion: Concept, Application, and Scrutiny*. Asian
Development Bank, 2000.

Servaes, J. ‘Introduction’ in J. Servaes (ed) *Communication for
Development and Social Change*, New Delhi: Sage, 2008, pp. 14-30.

Shaw, G., G. Shaw, and P. D'Abbs. *Community Safety and Wellbeing
Research Study: Consolidated Report*, Canberra: Department of Families,
Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, 2011.

Sleath, E., and N. Maloney. ‘Mobile Phone Hotspots Trialled in the
Outback’, *ABC News,*
[*http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2015/03/16/4198439.htm*](http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2015/03/16/4198439.htm).

Smith, D.E. *Toward an Aboriginal Household Expenditure Survey:
Conceptual, Methodological and Cultural Considerations*, Canberra: ANU
Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 1991.

Sreekumar, T.T., and M. Rivera–Sánchez. ‘ICTs and Development Revisiting
the Asian Experience’, *Science Technology & Society* 13.2 (2008):
159-174.

Sutton, P. *The Politics of Suffering: Indigenous Australia and the End
of the Liberal Consensus*, Carlton: Melbourne University Publishing,
2009.

Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council. *Ingerrekenhe
Antirrkweme: Mobile Phone Use among Low Income Aboriginal People - a
Central Australian Snapshot*. Alice Springs: Tangentyere Council
Research Hub and Central Land Council, 2007.

Tanner, S. *Measuring the Impact of Digital Resources: The Balanced
Value Impact Model*. London: King’s College, 2012.

Taylor, J. ‘Housing Programs at Edward River and Mitchell River
Aboriginal Reserves’ in M. Heppell (ed) *A Black Reality: Aboriginal
Camps and Housing in Remote Australia*, Canberra: Australian Institute
of Aboriginal Studies, 1979, pp. 207-228.

———. *Population and Diversity: Policy Implications of Emerging
Indigenous Demographic Trends*. Canberra: Centre for Aboriginal Economic
Policy Research, 2006.

*Telecommunications Action Plan for Remote Indigenous Communities:
Report on the Strategic Study for Improving Telecommunications in Remote
Indigenous Communities*. Canberra: Department of Communications,
Informations Technology & the Arts, 2002.

Telstra. ‘Universal Service Obligation Standard Marketing Plan’,
[*https://www.telstra.com.au/content/dam/tcom/personal/consumer-advice/doc/consumer/uso-standard-marketing-plan.doc*](https://www.telstra.com.au/content/dam/tcom/personal/consumer-advice/doc/consumer/uso-standard-marketing-plan.doc).

Tenhunen, S. ‘Mobile Technology in the Village: ICTs, Culture, and
Social Logistics in India’, *Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute* 14.3 (2008): 515-534.

Thas, A., C. Ramilo and C. Cinoco. ‘Gender and ICT’, *UNDP Asia-Pacific
Development Information Programme E-Primer*, New Delhi: Elsevier, 2007.

The Parliament of Australia Senate Standing Committee on Community
Affairs. *Inquiry into Issues Surrounding Cyber-Safety for Indigenous
Australians*, Canberra: Joint Select Committee on Cyber-Safety, 2013.

———. ‘Inquiry into Petrol Sniffing and Substance Abuse in Central
Australia’, Commonwealth of Australia,
[*http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary\_Business/Committees/Senate/Community\_Affairs/Completed\_inquiries/2008-10/petrol\_sniffing\_substance\_abuse08/index*](http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Community_Affairs/Completed_inquiries/2008-10/petrol_sniffing_substance_abuse08/index).

Thomson, D. F. *Bindibu Country*, Melbourne: Thomas Nelson, 1975.

Thorner, S. ‘Imagining an Indigital Interface: Ara Irititja Indigenizes
the Technologies of Knowledge Management’, *Collections* 6.3 (2010):
125-146.

Tingle, L. *Political Amnesia: How We Forgot How to Govern*, Quarterly
Essay, Melbourne: Black Inc., 2015.

Tonkinson, R. *The Jigalong Mob: Aboriginal Victors of the Desert
Crusade*. Menlo Park, Calif: Cummings Publishing Company, 1974.

US Department of Commerce, *A Nation Online: How Americans Are Expanding Their Use of the Internet*, Economics and Statistics Administration and National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 2002.

van Deursen, A., J. van Dijk and M. Peter. ‘Increasing Inequalities in
What We Do Online: A Longitudinal Cross Sectional Analysis of Internet
Activities among the Dutch Population (2010 to 2013) over Gender, Age,
Education, and Income’, *Telematics and informatics* 32.2 (2015):
259-272.

Van Dijk, J. and K. Hacker. ‘The Digital Divide as a Complex and Dynamic
Phenomenon’, *The Information Society* 19.4 (2003): 315-326.

Vanstone, A. *Beyond Conspicuous Compassion: Indigenous Australians
Deserve More Than Good Intentions*, Address to the Australia and New
Zealand School of Government, Australian National University, Canberra,
7 December 2005.

Verran, H. and M. Christie. ‘Postcolonial Databasing? Subverting Old
Appropriations, Developing New Associations’ in J. Leach and L. Wilson
(eds) *Subversion, Conversion, Development: Diversity and the Adoption
and Use of Information and Communication Technologies*, Cambridge: MIT
Press, 2014, pp. 57-76.

Victory, N.J. and K.B. Cooper. *A Nation Online: How Americans Are
Expanding Their Use of the Internet*. Canberra: Economics and Statistics
Administration and National Telecommunications and Information
Administration, 2002.

Vodafone Hutchison Australia. *Regional Telecommunications Review 2015:
Submission by Vodafone Hutchison Australia*, 2015.

Warschauer, M. ‘Dissecting the “Digital Divide”: A Case Study in Egypt’,
*The Information Society* 19.4 (2003): 297-304.

Warschauer, M. and Matuchniak, T., ‘New Technology and Digital Worlds: Analyzing Evidence of Equity in Access, Use, and Outcomes’, *Review of Research in Education* 34.1 (2010): 180.
Weber, S. and S. Dixon. *Growing up Online: Young People and Digital
Technologies*, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.

Weiner, A.B. ‘Cultural Difference and the Density of Objects’, *American
Ethnologist* 21.2 (1994): 391-403.

Wilson, K.R., J.S. Wallin and C. Reiser. ‘Social Stratification and the
Digital Divide’, *Social Science Computer Review* 21.2 (2003): 133-143.

Woolcock, M. and D. Narayan. ‘Social Capital: Implications for
Development Theory, Research, and Policy’, *The World Bank Research
Observer* 15, no. 2 (2000): 225-249.

Yunkaporta, T. *Aboriginal Pedagogies at the Cultural Interface,*
Professional Doctorate (Research) thesis, James Cook University,
Townsville, Qld, 2009.

List of Acronyms
================

  -------- -------------------------------------------------------------
  ABS      Australian Bureau of Statistics Australian Communications
  ACCAN    Consumer Action Network Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
  ATSIC    Commission Centre for Appropriate Technology Community
  CAT CDEP Development Employment Projects Community Living Area Central
  CLA CLC  Land Council Indigenous Communications Program Information
  ICP ICT  Communication Technology Interim Satellite Service Long Term
  ISS LTSS Satellite Service National Broadband Network Northern
  NBN NTER Territory Emergency Response National Telecommunications and
  NTIA     Information Administration Remote Indigenous Public Internet
  RIPIA    Access Regional Telecommunications Independent Review
  RTIRC    Committee Standard Telephone Services Telecommunications
  STS      Action Plan for Remote Indigenous Communities Universal
  TAPRIC   Service Obligation
  USO      

  Appendix 

  &lt;span ="\_Toc318452860" class="anchor"&gt;<span id="_Toc419811704"
  id       class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811503"
           class="anchor"></span></span></span>Appendix 1: Transition to
           the National Broadband Network (NBN) Interim Satellite
           Service (ISS)

  ke-up of ISS services for the majority of householders was consistent
  th their intentions in September 2013. In total, ten households ith
  ompared  seventeen households or community buildings originally n the
  w        project) ultimately retained the use of the internet. een
  nnected  considerable change in the total composition of engaged in
  i ere    the project since the original implementation in number of
  has b    households were added and/or changed resident d most of the
  useholds shared building computers were re-distributed al households
  d-2011:  along the way. The table below summarizes these
  a mbers, 
  an       
  individu 
  anges.   

  pan      Toc445560894" class="anchor"&gt;</span>Table 1: Changes of
  id="\_   uildings and houses
  atus of  
  b        

  \*\*Comm ty\*\* **Building** **Original status mid-2011** **Post
  uni      transition status early 2014**
  -------- -------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                             Internet connection?

**Kwale Kwale** Community shed 2 shared computers yes - both Residence 1
1 computer yes Residence 2 1 computer yes

**Mungalawurru** Community shed 2 shared computers yes - both Residence
1 nil\
 Residence 2 \^Note\\ 1\^ 1 computer yes Residence 3 1 computer yes
Residence 4 1 computer yes **Imangara** Women’s Centre 2 shared
computers yes - both Residence 1 1 computer yes Residence 2 1 computer
yes Residence 3 1 computer yes Residence 4 1 computer yes Residence 5 1
computer yes Residence 6 Nil 1 computer Residence 7 1 computer yes
Residence 8 1 computer yes Residence 9 1 computer yes Residence 10 Nil 1
computer Residence 11 Nil 1 computer \^Note\\ 3\^ Residence 12 Nil 1
computer Residence 13 1 computer yes

**Total** 20 computers 20 of 20

Note 1: Computer is now located in Tennant Creek township. Resident
obtains internet connection via a smartphone.

Note 2: These houses were demolished and rebuilt during 2013.

Note 3: Computer is not installed in this house at the time of writing.

Note 4: This house had internet connection from January 2013 until end
October 2013 i.e. prior to the transition<span id="_Toc419811705"
class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811504" class="anchor"></span></span>.

Appendix 2: Location and Movement of the Computers in the\
Communities
----------------------------------------------------------

Eleven computers were installed in Imangara from late July to early
August 2011; two were located in the Women’s Centre for use by the
general community and by the couple running the Centre, while the
remainder were installed in individual houses. Later in the project, an
additional three computers were installed in individual houses not
originally included in the study (Figure 1). Although this community
building is called the Women’s Centre, this space is not the exclusive
domain of women. Some men regularly visited the Women’s Centre, and at
least two men were frequent users of its computers during the project.

<span id="_Toc445560895" class="anchor"></span>Figure 1: Location of
households in Imangara that participated in the study in July 2011 with
later additions up to the end of September 2013 noted

![](imgs/Rennie_Image1.tif)

In Mungalawurru, five computers were installed in June 2011, three in
individual houses and two in what was referred to as the ‘CDEP shed’,
which was considered to be a public space accessible by all community
members (Figure 2). One of these was notionally allocated to a female
resident, while the other was understood to be a computer for shared use
by those community members who did not receive household computers.

<span id="_Toc445560896" class="anchor"></span>Figure 2: Location of
households in Mungalawurru participating in the study in July 2011

![](imgs/Rennie_Image2.tif)

Within the first twelve months of the project’s longitudinal phase, 45
per cent of participants at Imangara and 80 per cent of participants at
Mungalawurru had signed formal ownership agreements. Additional formal
take-up occurred between September 2012 and September 2013: one
participant at Mugalawurru, and two residents at Imangara – one of whom
was not initially involved in the HIP study – signed formal ownership
agreements. By the end of September 2013, 69 per cent of computers at
Imangara and 100 per cent of those at Mungalawurru were subject to
formal ownership agreements.

Despite equipment failure, loss or damage, an average of seventeen of
the twenty computers installed by early August 2011 were operational
during the nine months through to the end of April 2014. (Two computers
failed but could be repaired, another was taken out of the community and
returned with components missing, and the only laptop was irreparably
damaged by a small child.)

<span id="_Toc445560897" class="anchor"></span>Table 2: Failures or
losses of core equipment August 2011 to September 2013 inclusive

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> **Item** &gt; **Total installed population** &gt; **Qty lost/** &gt;
> **Qty failed or damaged beyond repair (B)** &gt; **Qty non-** &gt;
> **Mean time between failures (months)** &gt; &gt;\
>  &gt; **removed by resident** &gt; **functioning and repaired (C)**
> **(B & C)**

                                                  **(A)**                                                                                                          

> Computer 22 2 8 14 26

> Monitor 21 2 7 1 68

> Computer 22 2 15 15 19
>
> /Monitor

> Printer 18 2 22 19 11

> UPS 20 8 65

> Network 19 2 2 9 45 ------------ ----------------------------------
> ---------------------------
> -----------------------------------------------
> ------------------------------------
> -------------------------------------------

By comparison with this total of twenty-two computer failures over the
twenty-five-month project period, a large survey of failure rates in
corporate desktop computers referenced at
[*http://www.partnerinfo.lenovo.com/partners/us/products/downloads/thinkcentre-mseries/TBR-Quality-Study-ExecSummary.pdf*](http://www.partnerinfo.lenovo.com/partners/us/products/downloads/thinkcentre-mseries/TBR-Quality-Study-ExecSummary.pdf)
recorded an average 15.29 per cent failure rate, requiring warranty
repair over the first two years of service, or 3.5 failures for an
equivalent population of twenty-two computers over twenty-five months.

<span id="_Toc445560898" class="anchor"></span>Table 3: Number of inter-
and intra-community computer relocations and removals from the community
according to ownership status at the time of relocation/removal,
post-installation phase, August 2014, Imangara and Mungalawurru

  **Incident type and ownership status at time of incident**             **Imangara**                     **Mungalawarru**   **Total**   
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------- ------------------ ----------- --
  Intra-community relocation                                             Number Shared\*                  2                  1           
                                                                         Number Nominally owned           2                  3           
                                                                         Number Western Legal Ownership   0                  1           
  Removals to Alice Springs by researchers owing to technical failures   Number Shared                    0                  1           
                                                                         Number Nominally owned           6                  1           
                                                                         Number Western Legal Ownership   3                  3           
  Removals to locations outside of the community by participants         Number Shared                    0                  0           
                                                                         Number Nominally owned           2                  0           
                                                                         Number Western Legal Ownership   1                  1           

<span id="_Toc445560899" class="anchor"></span>Figure 3: Inter and
intra-comunity computer movements by residents and type of ownership at
the time movement occurred, between July 2011 and August 2014, Imangara

![](imgs/Rennie_Image3.tif) <span id="_Toc419811706"
class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811505" class="anchor"></span></span>

Appendix 3: Gender and Uses
---------------------------

Figure 4: Gender and technical function. Source: Seemann, Kurt W.,
Matthew Parnell, Stephen McFallan, and Selwyn Tucker. Housing for
Livelihoods: The Lifecycle of Housing and Infrastructure through a
Whole-of-System Approach in Remote Aboriginal Settlements. Vol. 29,
Alice Springs: Desert Knowledge CRC, 2008 (Reproduced with permission of
the author).

![](imgs/Rennie_Image4.tif)

<span id="_Toc445560900" class="anchor"></span>Figure 5: Computer uses
(number of users), November 2012

![](imgs/Rennie_Image5.tif)

<span id="_Toc445560901" class="anchor"></span>Figure 6: Computer uses
(minutes per day), November 2012

![](imgs/Rennie_Image6.tif)

<span id="_Toc419811506" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc445560902"
class="anchor"></span></span>Figure 7: Who uses the computer most often?
![](imgs/Rennie_Image7.tif)

<span id="toc419811506" class="anchor"></span>

<span id="_Toc445560903" class="anchor"></span>Figure 8: Women's top
five ICT activities ![](imgs/Rennie_Image8.tif)

<span id="_Toc445560904" class="anchor"></span>Figure 9: Men's top five
ICT activities ![](imgs/Rennie_Image9.tif)

<span id="_Toc445560905" class="anchor"></span>Figure 10: How
participants learned new tasks ![](imgs/Rennie_Image10.tif)

<span id="_Toc445560906" class="anchor"></span>Figure 11: Percentage of
each task type requested by learners or suggested by researchers
![](imgs/Rennie_Image11.tif)

<span id="_Toc445560907" class="anchor"></span>Figure 12: Frequency of
the different types of learning tasks illustrated as a percentage of all
learning opportunities during fieldtrips ![](imgs/Rennie_Image12.tif)

<span id="_Toc419811707" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811507"
class="anchor"><span id="toc419811707" class="anchor"><span
id="toc419811507" class="anchor"></span></span></span></span>

<span id="_Toc419811707" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc419811507" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc318452863" class="anchor"></span></span></span>Appendix 4: ICT Program Models and their Features
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc445560908" class="anchor"></span>Table 4: Three community
computing program models and their features

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Feature** **‘Home Computing’** **‘Community Wi Fi’** **‘Community
  Internet Access Center’ model**

  **Model** **model** **(centralized internet facilities and computers in
  a supervised room within a community building)**

  **(distributed internet facilities and computer in each household)**
  **(centralized internet facilities with users connecting to those using
  WiFi capable computing devices)**
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

**Typical funding model** External funder pays for individual internet
connections and computing devices; households pay own internet access
fees External funder pays for internet access and WiFi facilities; users
supply their own computing devices External funder pays for all
facilities and supervision

**Capital costs** High aggregate cost for individual satellite internet
connections and computer hardware at all households - Medium cost for
shared local area network hardware and satellite internet connection at
community level - Medium cost for centralized shared satellite internet
access and PC hardware in single building

                                                                                                                                                                                                             -   High costs to users for computer hardware                                                                 -   High building cost (*either* capital cost for new building *or* ongoing rental cost for existing building)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

**Operational costs** - High aggregate internet access charges - Medium
internet access charges - Medium internet access charges

                                                                                -   High maintenance costs for computing devices (borne by user)                                                             -   Low network maintenance costs                                                                             -   Low network maintenance costs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -   High maintenance costs for computing devices (borne by user)                                              -   Low maintenance costs for computing devices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -   Very high supervision cost, including supervisor accommodation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -   Variable building maintenance costs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

**Overall costs** High Medium High

**Focus** Family centered Individual user Individual user or small
groups

**Suitability for mixed gender use** Yes, but the model may encourage
use along gender lines i.e. that the women are responsible for managing
and paying for it Yes, but care needed with placement Group(s) of one
gender may dominate use, making the other reluctant to use the facility

**Suitability for young children** Yes No – access to portable devices
unlikely Yes, with parental supervision

**Facilitating school learning** School student friendly with parental
support Limited Collateral support for schooling with teacher and
supervisor collaboration

**Suitability for** Yes Limited – familiarity with mobile computing
devices less likely Group(s) of younger users may dominate use, making
older people reluctant to use the facility. Physical access (walking
distance) may also be an issue.

**older residents**

**Compatibility with capacity offered by NBN satellite consumer
services?** High Medium – multiple satellite services may be needed
Medium – multiple satellite services may be needed

**Reliability of network services and equipment** High High High

**Reliability of computing devices** Low – exposed to home environment
Low – exposed to outdoor environment High – assisted by physical
environment and supervision

**Suitability for high level of resident mobility between households?**
Low High – supports portable devices Varies depending on where residents
move to

**Limitations** Home environment often not suitable for care of
computing hardware (PC, printer) - Multiple WiFi Access Points required
for larger communities - Suitable community building may not be
available

                                                                                                                                                                                                             -   Limited or no coverage within buildings                                                                   -   Only accessible during staffed hours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -   No option for the resident to own their own computer, so may be seen as ‘second choice’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 

[^1]: With the exception of the Central Land Council (CLC).

[^2]: The research involved interviews with approximately 100 people in
    Ali Curung in late 2013, with representation from half of all
    households.

[^3]: The Broadband for the Bush network is the one forum where this
    occurs (www.broadbandforthebush.com.au). All four partners in the
    Home Internet Project were involved in Broadband for the Bush during
    the life of the project, for the purposes of knowledge sharing and
    capacity building.

[^4]: A. Gray, personal communication, 3 July 2013.

[^5]: Communities with Telstra mobile coverage in the region as of
    August 2015: Ali Curung, Ampilawatja, Arlpara, Ti Tree, Yuendumu,
    Papunya, Hermannsburg, Mutitjulu, Santa Teresa, Lajamanu, Elliot,
    and Newcastle Waters, as well as the townships of Alice Springs and
    Tennant Creek, including town camps. The community of Amoonguna had
    coverage due to its proximity to Alice Springs. Other non-community
    sites included Granites mine, Barkly homestead/Wayside Inn, Barrow
    Creek, Urapunja power station, and the Erldunda road house.

    Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Macdonnel and Barkly Statistical
    Area 3, Indigenous Profile, by Household’,
    www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home.

[^6]: With the exception of the Central Land Council (CLC).

[^7]: The research involved interviews with approximately 100 people in
    Ali Curung in late 2013, with representation from half of all
    households.

[^8]: The Broadband for the Bush network is the one forum where this
    occurs (www.broadbandforthebush.com.au). All four partners in the
    Home Internet Project were involved in Broadband for the Bush during
    the life of the project, for the purposes of knowledge sharing and
    capacity building.

[^9]: A. Gray, personal communication, 3 July 2013.

[^10]: Communities with Telstra mobile coverage in the region as of
    August 2015: Ali Curung, Ampilawatja, Arlpara, Ti Tree, Yuendumu,
    Papunya, Hermannsburg, Mutitjulu, Santa Teresa, Lajamanu, Elliot,
    and Newcastle Waters, as well as the townships of Alice Springs and
    Tennant Creek, including town camps. The community of Amoonguna had
    coverage due to its proximity to Alice Springs. Other non-community
    sites included Granites mine, Barkly homestead/Wayside Inn, Barrow
    Creek, Urapunja power station, and the Erldunda road house.

    Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Macdonnel and Barkly Statistical
    Area 3, Indigenous Profile, by Household’,
    www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home.

[^11]: Ampilatwatja, Arlparra, Newcastle Waters, Papunya and Mutijulu.
    Mutijulu had some coverage prior to this due to its proximity to
    Yulara (Uluru tourist township).

[^12]: Australian Communications and Media Authority, ‘Communications
    Report 2009-10’,
    http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/\_assets/main/lib311995/2009-10\_comms\_report-complete.pdf.

[^13]: Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council,
    *Ingerrekenhe Antirrkweme: Mobile Phone Use among Low Income
    Aboriginal People - a Central Australian Snapshot*, Alice Springs:
    Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council, 2007, p.
    6.

[^14]: F.R. Brady, L.E. Dyson and T. Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of
    Mobile Phones and Oral Culture’, Cultural Attitudes Towards
    Technology and Communications, Murdoch University, Perth, 2008, p.
    393.

[^15]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones and
    Oral Culture’, pp. 393-4.

[^16]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones and
    Oral Culture’, p. 396.

[^17]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones and
    Oral Culture’, p. 396.

[^18]: I. Razak, ‘Telstra Accused of Ripping Off Aborigines’, *ABC
    News*, http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2009/09/09/2680645.

[^19]: E. Sleath and N. Maloney, ‘Mobile Phone Hotspots Trialled in the
    Outback’, *ABC News*,
    http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2015/03/16/4198439.htm.

[^20]: Endaga sales material, endaga.com.

[^21]: ‘DIY Telecoms’, *The Economist* (March 7 2015*)*,
    http://www.economist.com/news/technology-quarterly/21645498-fed-up-failings-big-operators-remote-mexican-communities-are-acting.

[^22]: Rhizomatica, ‘About’, http://rhizomatica.org/about-2/.

[^23]: T. Hatt, K. Okeleke and M. Meloan, ‘Closing the Coverage Gap - a
    View from Asia’, *GSMA Intelligence* (June 2015*)*,
    https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=e245c423854fcfd38eeae0a918cc91c8&download.

[^24]: G. Goggin and J. Clark. ‘Mobile Phones and Community Development:
    A Contact Zone between Media and Citizenship’, *Development in
    Practice* 19:4-5 (2009): 595.

[^25]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^26]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^27]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^28]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^29]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 74.

[^30]: H. Galperin, and F. Bar, ‘The Microtelco Opportunity: Evidence
    from Latin America’, *Information Technologies & International
    Development* 3.2 (2006): 73.

[^31]: With the exception of the Central Land Council (CLC).

[^32]: The research involved interviews with approximately 100 people in
    Ali Curung in late 2013, with representation from half of all
    households.

[^33]: The Broadband for the Bush network is the one forum where this
    occurs (www.broadbandforthebush.com.au). All four partners in the
    Home Internet Project were involved in Broadband for the Bush during
    the life of the project, for the purposes of knowledge sharing and
    capacity building.

[^34]: A. Gray, personal communication, 3 July 2013.

[^35]: Communities with Telstra mobile coverage in the region as of
    August 2015: Ali Curung, Ampilawatja, Arlpara, Ti Tree, Yuendumu,
    Papunya, Hermannsburg, Mutitjulu, Santa Teresa, Lajamanu, Elliot,
    and Newcastle Waters, as well as the townships of Alice Springs and
    Tennant Creek, including town camps. The community of Amoonguna had
    coverage due to its proximity to Alice Springs. Other non-community
    sites included Granites mine, Barkly homestead/Wayside Inn, Barrow
    Creek, Urapunja power station, and the Erldunda road house.

    Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Macdonnel and Barkly Statistical
    Area 3, Indigenous Profile, by Household’,
    www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home.

[^36]: Ampilatwatja, Arlparra, Newcastle Waters, Papunya and Mutijulu.
    Mutijulu had some coverage prior to this due to its proximity to
    Yulara (Uluru tourist township).

[^37]: Australian Communications and Media Authority, ‘Communications
    Report 2009-10’,
    http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/\_assets/main/lib311995/2009-10\_comms\_report-complete.pdf.

[^38]: Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council,
    *Ingerrekenhe Antirrkweme: Mobile Phone Use among Low Income
    Aboriginal People - a Central Australian Snapshot*, Alice Springs:
    Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council, 2007, p.
    6.

[^39]: F.R. Brady, L.E. Dyson and T. Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of
    Mobile Phones and Oral Culture’, Cultural Attitudes Towards
    Technology and Communications, Murdoch University, Perth, 2008, p.
    393.

[^40]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones and
    Oral Culture’, pp. 393-4.

[^41]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones and
    Oral Culture’, p. 396.

[^42]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones and
    Oral Culture’, p. 396.

[^43]: I. Razak, ‘Telstra Accused of Ripping Off Aborigines’, *ABC
    News*, http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2009/09/09/2680645.

[^44]: E. Sleath and N. Maloney, ‘Mobile Phone Hotspots Trialled in the
    Outback’, *ABC News*,
    http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2015/03/16/4198439.htm.

[^45]: Endaga sales material, endaga.com.

[^46]: ‘DIY Telecoms’, *The Economist* (March 7 2015*)*,
    http://www.economist.com/news/technology-quarterly/21645498-fed-up-failings-big-operators-remote-mexican-communities-are-acting.

[^47]: Rhizomatica, ‘About’, http://rhizomatica.org/about-2/.

[^48]: T. Hatt, K. Okeleke and M. Meloan, ‘Closing the Coverage Gap - a
    View from Asia’, *GSMA Intelligence* (June 2015*)*,
    https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=e245c423854fcfd38eeae0a918cc91c8&download.

[^49]: G. Goggin and J. Clark. ‘Mobile Phones and Community Development:
    A Contact Zone between Media and Citizenship’, *Development in
    Practice* 19:4-5 (2009): 595.

[^50]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^51]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^52]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^53]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^54]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 74.

[^55]: H. Galperin, and F. Bar, ‘The Microtelco Opportunity: Evidence
    from Latin America’, *Information Technologies & International
    Development* 3.2 (2006): 73.

[^56]: H. Galperin and J. Mariscal, ‘Digital Poverty: Latin American and
    Caribbean Perspectives’, *Practical Publishing* (2007),
    http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Resources/Publications/openebooks/342-3/index.html,
    p. 96.

[^57]: Such as the O3B non-geostationary satellites (backed by Google
    and other investors), which orbit close to earth and therefore offer
    low latency speeds – making voice connections acceptable – and fast
    loading for data services. O3B was designed to serve the ‘Other 3
    Billion’ who do not have internet connections, and is providing
    satellite backhaul for mobile broadband in countries such as the
    Solomon Islands.

[^58]: S. Corner, ‘Universal Telecommunications Services: A Brief
    History and Analysis of the Issues Surrounding the New Australian
    Legislation on the Universal Service Obligation’,
    *Telecommunications Journal of Australia* 62.2 (2012): 22.

[^59]: Corner, ‘Universal Telecommunications Services: A Brief History
    and Analysis of the Issues Surrounding the New Australian
    Legislation on the Universal Service Obligation’.

    S. Davies, *Urban Based Support for Rural and Remote Australian
    Telecommunications*, Broadband for the Bush Alliance, 2014.

[^60]: K.R. Wilson, J.S. Wallin and C. Reiser, ‘Social Stratification
    and the Digital Divide’, *Social Science Computer Review* 21.2
    (2003).

    J. Van Dijk and K. Hacker, ‘The Digital Divide as a Complex and
    Dynamic Phenomenon’, *The Information Society* 19.4 (2003).

    Norris, Pippa. ‘The Worldwide Digital Divide’, Annual Meeting of the
    Political Studies Association of the UK, London School of Economics
    and Political Science, 2000.

    N. Selwyn, ‘Reconsidering Political and Popular Understandings of
    the Digital Divide’, *New Media & Society* 6.3 (2004).

[^61]: Dutton, Shepherd C. Di Gennaro, ‘Digital Divides and Choices
    Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns of
    Internet Diffusion and Use’.

[^62]: Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage
    and the Information Society*, p. 9.

[^63]: Dutton, Shepherd and Di Gennaro, ‘Digital Divides and Choices
    Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns of
    Internet Diffusion and Use’, p. 33.

[^64]: N. Biddle, *CAEPR Indigenous Population Project 2011 Census
    Papers*, Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy
    Research, 2013.

[^65]: Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Patterns of Internet Access in
    Australia’,
    http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/8146.0.55.001/.

[^66]: Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Patterns of Internet Access in
    Australia’.

[^67]: It is possible to do this analysis by aggregating populations at
    a more nuanced level by mobile reception coordinates rather than
    ILOCs. However, Telstra was unable to provide accurate coordinates
    for mobile coverage in 2011.

[^68]: Peculiarities in the data relating to the type of internet
    connection are likely to have been the result of the way in which
    the survey was administered. The census is completed in remote
    communities with the assistance of ABS staff, who administer the
    survey door-to-door, whereas elsewhere it is completed by household
    members either online or on paper. The census asked residents what
    type of internet connection was available at the dwelling. The
    options included ‘broadband’, ‘dial-up’ and ‘other’, with an
    explanatory note that ‘other’ includes ‘internet access through
    mobile phones etc’. However, in Santa Teresa, a community with
    mobile coverage, no dwellings were identified as having an ‘other’
    internet connection, while thirty houses chose ‘not stated’. In
    Yuendumu, twenty-seven houses stated that they had an ‘other’
    connection and only three were not stated. There are a number of
    possible explanations for these inconsistencies, including whether
    the question was adequately explained to the participant, as well as
    confusion as to whether individual access to the internet via a
    mobile device is considered to belong to a dwelling or not. Despite
    these discrepancies, when grouped into ILOCs with mobile coverage
    and those without, the differences in internet adoption appear to be
    statistically significant.

[^69]: Rennie et al., ‘At Home on the Outstation: Barriers to Home
    Internet in Remote Indigenous Communities’, p. 590.

[^70]: Central Australian Youth Link Up Service, *Proposal Re: Better
    Way of Providing Broadband in Remote Communities*, Alice Springs:
    Tangentyere Council, 2014.

[^71]: Rennie et al., ‘At Home on the Outstation: Barriers to Home
    Internet in Remote Indigenous Communities’, pp. 591.

    Hogan et al., *Submission to the Inquiry into Issues Surrounding
    Cyber-Safety for Indigenous Australians*.

[^72]: J. Finlayson and A.J. Auld, ‘Shoe or Stew?: Balancing Wants and
    Needs in Indigenous Households: A Study of Appropriate Income
    Support Payments and Policies for Families’, ANU Centre for
    Aboriginal Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 182, 1999.

    D.E. Smith, *Toward an Aboriginal Household Expenditure Survey:
    Conceptual, Methodological and Cultural Considerations*, Canberra:
    ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 1991, p. 13.

[^73]: M. Hilbert, ‘The End Justifies the Definition: The Manifold
    Outlooks on the Digital Divide and Their Practical Usefulness for
    Policy-Making’, *Telecommunications Policy* 35.8 (2011): 718.

[^74]: F. Brady, L.E. Dyson and Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council,
    *Report to Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council on Mobile Technology
    in the Bloomfield River Valley*, 2009, p. 396.

[^75]: Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage
    and the Information Society*.

[^76]: Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage
    and the Information Society,* p. 10-11.

[^77]: P.E. Earl, ‘Economics and Psychology: A Survey’, *The Economic
    Journal* 100.402 (1990).

[^78]: M.S. Granovetter, ‘The Strength of Weak Ties’, *American Journal
    of Sociology* 78.6 (1973).

[^79]: M. Woolcock and D. Narayan, ‘Social Capital: Implications for
    Development Theory, Research, and Policy’, *The World Bank Research
    Observer* 15.2 (2000).

[^80]: Kral, ‘Youth Media as Cultural Practice: Remote Indigenous Youth
    Speaking out Loud’.

[^81]: B. Crump, and A. McIlroy, ‘The Digital Divide: Why the
    "Don't-Want-Tos" Won't Compute: Lessons from a New Zealand ICT
    Project, *First Monday* 8.12 (2003).

[^82]: B. Hunter, ‘Indigenous Social Exclusion: Insights and Challenges
    for the Concept of Social Inclusion’, *Family Matters*, 82 (2009):
    52.

[^83]: I. Kral, *Plugged In: Remote Australian Indigenous Youth and
    Digital Culture*.

[^84]: V. Godinho, *Money, Financial Capability and Well-Being in
    Indigenous Australia,* Melbourne: RMIT University, 2014, p. 8.

[^85]: Godinho, *Money, Financial Capability and Well-Being in
    Indigenous Australia,* p. 2.

    See also L. Hems, C. Connolly and M. Georgouras, ‘Measuring
    Financial Exclusion in Australia’ for National Australia Bank,
    Sydney: Centre for Social Impact (CSI), University of New South
    Wales, 2012.

[^86]: Rennie et al., *Home Internet for Remote Indigenous Communities*,
    pp. 46-47.

[^87]: Asking for assistance with online banking is also problematic for
    some people, leading to privacy breaches and theft. Financial abuse
    by family members through online banking is an area that requires
    further research.

[^88]: See Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform
    Association, ‘ATM Fees in Indigenous Communities’,
    http://www.afccra.org/media%20releases%20documents/ATM%20Fees%20in%20Remote%20Indigenous%20Communities.pdf.

[^89]: See Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform
    Association, ‘ATM Fees in Indigenous Communities’, p. 8.

[^90]: See Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform
    Association, ‘ATM Fees in Indigenous Communities’, p. 7.

[^91]: A. Lattas and B. Morris, ‘The Politics of Suffering and the
    Politics of Anthropology’ in J. Altman and M. Hinkson (eds) *Culture
    Crisis: Anthropology and Politics in Aboriginal Australia*, Chicago:
    University of New South Wales Press, 2010, pp. 123-124.

[^92]: Coalition, ‘The Coalition's Policy for E-Government and the
    Digital Economy’.

[^93]: A. Doron and R. Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the
    Cheap Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*,
    Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2013, pp. 222, 224.

[^94]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*.

[^95]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 224.

[^96]: See J. Altman, ‘Development Options on Aboriginal Land:
    Sustainable Indigenous Hybrid Economies in the Twenty-First Century’
    in L. Taylor, G. Ward, G. Henderson, R. Davis and L. Wallis (eds)
    *The Power of Knowledge, the Resonance of Tradition,* Canberra:
    Aboriginal Studies Press, 2005.

[^97]: The young woman in the story opening this chapter made a wall
    poster from an online article about her grandfather’s days as a
    stockman.

[^98]: In January 2014, ABC news reported that the community of Haasts
    Bluff had started fundraising to erect a 20-meter high neon crucifix
    on a hill, with an estimated cost of \$1.2 million. G. Liston,
    ‘Remote Community Hopes to Erect Giant Neon Crucifix’,
    http://www.abc.net.au/news/2008-09-25/fiery-debate-over-dpp-decision/521100.

[^99]: P. Olsen, ‘Teenagers Say Goodbye to Facebook and Hello to
    Messenger Apps’, *The Guardian*, 10 November 2013.

[^100]: Divas Chat is a dating and messaging service owned by Canadian
    company airG and contracted to Telstra. It is popular amongst
    remote-living Aboriginal people as it can be accessed from a phone
    that has run out of credit. Debt accrued through subscription to
    airG (95c a day) is then deducted from the user’s Telstra credit
    when the mobile is recharged.

[^101]: L. Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report,* Alice Springs: Northern
    Territory Library and Central Australian Youth Link Up Service,
    2014, p. 10.

[^102]: This finding differs somewhat to Iten’s (2014); however, Iten
    interviewed a smaller sample and did not include ‘nil’ responses.

[^103]: M. Balogh, ‘Indigenous Australia Addicted to Facebook’, news
    release, 26 August 2014.

[^104]: B. Carlson, ‘The “New Frontier”: Emergent Indigenous Identities
    and Social Media’, in M. Harris, M. Nakata and B. Carlson (eds) *The
    Politics of Identity: Emerging Indigeneity*, Sydney: University of
    Technology Sydney E-Press, 2013.

[^105]: In early 2016, Indigitube was not available and the site was
    redirecting to ICTV Play, a video-on-demand service for the remote
    Indigenous community television service, ICTV.

[^106]: Barkly Arts, 8 August 2014. In fact, mobile phone charging uses
    a trivial amount of power.

[^107]: Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA),
    ‘Cybersmart Parents: Connecting Parents to Cyber-Safety Resources’,
    Canberra: Australian Media and Communications Authority, 2010, p. 6.

[^108]: With the exception of the Central Land Council (CLC).

[^109]: The research involved interviews with approximately 100 people
    in Ali Curung in late 2013, with representation from half of all
    households.

[^110]: The Broadband for the Bush network is the one forum where this
    occurs (www.broadbandforthebush.com.au). All four partners in the
    Home Internet Project were involved in Broadband for the Bush during
    the life of the project, for the purposes of knowledge sharing and
    capacity building.

[^111]: A. Gray, personal communication, 3 July 2013.

[^112]: Communities with Telstra mobile coverage in the region as of
    August 2015: Ali Curung, Ampilawatja, Arlpara, Ti Tree, Yuendumu,
    Papunya, Hermannsburg, Mutitjulu, Santa Teresa, Lajamanu, Elliot,
    and Newcastle Waters, as well as the townships of Alice Springs and
    Tennant Creek, including town camps. The community of Amoonguna had
    coverage due to its proximity to Alice Springs. Other non-community
    sites included Granites mine, Barkly homestead/Wayside Inn, Barrow
    Creek, Urapunja power station, and the Erldunda road house.

    Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Macdonnel and Barkly Statistical
    Area 3, Indigenous Profile, by Household’,
    www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home.

[^113]: Ampilatwatja, Arlparra, Newcastle Waters, Papunya and Mutijulu.
    Mutijulu had some coverage prior to this due to its proximity to
    Yulara (Uluru tourist township).

[^114]: Australian Communications and Media Authority, ‘Communications
    Report 2009-10’,
    http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/\_assets/main/lib311995/2009-10\_comms\_report-complete.pdf.

[^115]: Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council,
    *Ingerrekenhe Antirrkweme: Mobile Phone Use among Low Income
    Aboriginal People - a Central Australian Snapshot*, Alice Springs:
    Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council, 2007, p.
    6.

[^116]: F.R. Brady, L.E. Dyson and T. Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of
    Mobile Phones and Oral Culture’, Cultural Attitudes Towards
    Technology and Communications, Murdoch University, Perth, 2008, p.
    393.

[^117]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones
    and Oral Culture’, pp. 393-4.

[^118]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones
    and Oral Culture’, p. 396.

[^119]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones
    and Oral Culture’, p. 396.

[^120]: I. Razak, ‘Telstra Accused of Ripping Off Aborigines’, *ABC
    News*, http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2009/09/09/2680645.

[^121]: E. Sleath and N. Maloney, ‘Mobile Phone Hotspots Trialled in the
    Outback’, *ABC News*,
    http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2015/03/16/4198439.htm.

[^122]: Endaga sales material, endaga.com.

[^123]: ‘DIY Telecoms’, *The Economist* (March 7 2015*)*,
    http://www.economist.com/news/technology-quarterly/21645498-fed-up-failings-big-operators-remote-mexican-communities-are-acting.

[^124]: Rhizomatica, ‘About’, http://rhizomatica.org/about-2/.

[^125]: T. Hatt, K. Okeleke and M. Meloan, ‘Closing the Coverage Gap - a
    View from Asia’, *GSMA Intelligence* (June 2015*)*,
    https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=e245c423854fcfd38eeae0a918cc91c8&download.

[^126]: G. Goggin and J. Clark. ‘Mobile Phones and Community
    Development: A Contact Zone between Media and Citizenship’,
    *Development in Practice* 19:4-5 (2009): 595.

[^127]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^128]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^129]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^130]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^131]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 74.

[^132]: H. Galperin, and F. Bar, ‘The Microtelco Opportunity: Evidence
    from Latin America’, *Information Technologies & International
    Development* 3.2 (2006): 73.

[^133]: H. Galperin and J. Mariscal, ‘Digital Poverty: Latin American
    and Caribbean Perspectives’, *Practical Publishing* (2007),
    http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Resources/Publications/openebooks/342-3/index.html,
    p. 96.

[^134]: Such as the O3B non-geostationary satellites (backed by Google
    and other investors), which orbit close to earth and therefore offer
    low latency speeds – making voice connections acceptable – and fast
    loading for data services. O3B was designed to serve the ‘Other 3
    Billion’ who do not have internet connections, and is providing
    satellite backhaul for mobile broadband in countries such as the
    Solomon Islands.

[^135]: S. Corner, ‘Universal Telecommunications Services: A Brief
    History and Analysis of the Issues Surrounding the New Australian
    Legislation on the Universal Service Obligation’,
    *Telecommunications Journal of Australia* 62.2 (2012): 22.

[^136]: Corner, ‘Universal Telecommunications Services: A Brief History
    and Analysis of the Issues Surrounding the New Australian
    Legislation on the Universal Service Obligation’.

    S. Davies, *Urban Based Support for Rural and Remote Australian
    Telecommunications*, Broadband for the Bush Alliance, 2014.

[^137]: K.R. Wilson, J.S. Wallin and C. Reiser, ‘Social Stratification
    and the Digital Divide’, *Social Science Computer Review* 21.2
    (2003).

    J. Van Dijk and K. Hacker, ‘The Digital Divide as a Complex and
    Dynamic Phenomenon’, *The Information Society* 19.4 (2003).

    Norris, Pippa. ‘The Worldwide Digital Divide’, Annual Meeting of the
    Political Studies Association of the UK, London School of Economics
    and Political Science, 2000.

    N. Selwyn, ‘Reconsidering Political and Popular Understandings of
    the Digital Divide’, *New Media & Society* 6.3 (2004).

[^138]: Dutton, Shepherd C. Di Gennaro, ‘Digital Divides and Choices
    Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns of
    Internet Diffusion and Use’.

[^139]: Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage
    and the Information Society*, p. 9.

[^140]: Dutton, Shepherd and Di Gennaro, ‘Digital Divides and Choices
    Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns of
    Internet Diffusion and Use’, p. 33.

[^141]: N. Biddle, *CAEPR Indigenous Population Project 2011 Census
    Papers*, Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy
    Research, 2013.

[^142]: Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Patterns of Internet Access in
    Australia’,
    http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/8146.0.55.001/.

[^143]: Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Patterns of Internet Access in
    Australia’.

[^144]: It is possible to do this analysis by aggregating populations at
    a more nuanced level by mobile reception coordinates rather than
    ILOCs. However, Telstra was unable to provide accurate coordinates
    for mobile coverage in 2011.

[^145]: Peculiarities in the data relating to the type of internet
    connection are likely to have been the result of the way in which
    the survey was administered. The census is completed in remote
    communities with the assistance of ABS staff, who administer the
    survey door-to-door, whereas elsewhere it is completed by household
    members either online or on paper. The census asked residents what
    type of internet connection was available at the dwelling. The
    options included ‘broadband’, ‘dial-up’ and ‘other’, with an
    explanatory note that ‘other’ includes ‘internet access through
    mobile phones etc’. However, in Santa Teresa, a community with
    mobile coverage, no dwellings were identified as having an ‘other’
    internet connection, while thirty houses chose ‘not stated’. In
    Yuendumu, twenty-seven houses stated that they had an ‘other’
    connection and only three were not stated. There are a number of
    possible explanations for these inconsistencies, including whether
    the question was adequately explained to the participant, as well as
    confusion as to whether individual access to the internet via a
    mobile device is considered to belong to a dwelling or not. Despite
    these discrepancies, when grouped into ILOCs with mobile coverage
    and those without, the differences in internet adoption appear to be
    statistically significant.

[^146]: Rennie et al., ‘At Home on the Outstation: Barriers to Home
    Internet in Remote Indigenous Communities’, p. 590.

[^147]: Central Australian Youth Link Up Service, *Proposal Re: Better
    Way of Providing Broadband in Remote Communities*, Alice Springs:
    Tangentyere Council, 2014.

[^148]: Rennie et al., ‘At Home on the Outstation: Barriers to Home
    Internet in Remote Indigenous Communities’, pp. 591.

    Hogan et al., *Submission to the Inquiry into Issues Surrounding
    Cyber-Safety for Indigenous Australians*.

[^149]: J. Finlayson and A.J. Auld, ‘Shoe or Stew?: Balancing Wants and
    Needs in Indigenous Households: A Study of Appropriate Income
    Support Payments and Policies for Families’, ANU Centre for
    Aboriginal Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 182, 1999.

    D.E. Smith, *Toward an Aboriginal Household Expenditure Survey:
    Conceptual, Methodological and Cultural Considerations*, Canberra:
    ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 1991, p. 13.

[^150]: M. Hilbert, ‘The End Justifies the Definition: The Manifold
    Outlooks on the Digital Divide and Their Practical Usefulness for
    Policy-Making’, *Telecommunications Policy* 35.8 (2011): 718.

[^151]: F. Brady, L.E. Dyson and Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council,
    *Report to Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council on Mobile Technology
    in the Bloomfield River Valley*, 2009, p. 396.

[^152]: Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage
    and the Information Society*.

[^153]: Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage
    and the Information Society,* p. 10-11.

[^154]: P.E. Earl, ‘Economics and Psychology: A Survey’, *The Economic
    Journal* 100.402 (1990).

[^155]: M.S. Granovetter, ‘The Strength of Weak Ties’, *American Journal
    of Sociology* 78.6 (1973).

[^156]: M. Woolcock and D. Narayan, ‘Social Capital: Implications for
    Development Theory, Research, and Policy’, *The World Bank Research
    Observer* 15.2 (2000).

[^157]: Kral, ‘Youth Media as Cultural Practice: Remote Indigenous Youth
    Speaking out Loud’.

[^158]: B. Crump, and A. McIlroy, ‘The Digital Divide: Why the
    "Don't-Want-Tos" Won't Compute: Lessons from a New Zealand ICT
    Project, *First Monday* 8.12 (2003).

[^159]: B. Hunter, ‘Indigenous Social Exclusion: Insights and Challenges
    for the Concept of Social Inclusion’, *Family Matters*, 82 (2009):
    52.

[^160]: I. Kral, *Plugged In: Remote Australian Indigenous Youth and
    Digital Culture*.

[^161]: V. Godinho, *Money, Financial Capability and Well-Being in
    Indigenous Australia,* Melbourne: RMIT University, 2014, p. 8.

[^162]: Godinho, *Money, Financial Capability and Well-Being in
    Indigenous Australia,* p. 2.

    See also L. Hems, C. Connolly and M. Georgouras, ‘Measuring
    Financial Exclusion in Australia’ for National Australia Bank,
    Sydney: Centre for Social Impact (CSI), University of New South
    Wales, 2012.

[^163]: Rennie et al., *Home Internet for Remote Indigenous
    Communities*, pp. 46-47.

[^164]: Asking for assistance with online banking is also problematic
    for some people, leading to privacy breaches and theft. Financial
    abuse by family members through online banking is an area that
    requires further research.

[^165]: See Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform
    Association, ‘ATM Fees in Indigenous Communities’,
    http://www.afccra.org/media%20releases%20documents/ATM%20Fees%20in%20Remote%20Indigenous%20Communities.pdf.

[^166]: See Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform
    Association, ‘ATM Fees in Indigenous Communities’, p. 8.

[^167]: See Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform
    Association, ‘ATM Fees in Indigenous Communities’, p. 7.

[^168]: A. Lattas and B. Morris, ‘The Politics of Suffering and the
    Politics of Anthropology’ in J. Altman and M. Hinkson (eds) *Culture
    Crisis: Anthropology and Politics in Aboriginal Australia*, Chicago:
    University of New South Wales Press, 2010, pp. 123-124.

[^169]: Coalition, ‘The Coalition's Policy for E-Government and the
    Digital Economy’.

[^170]: A. Doron and R. Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the
    Cheap Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*,
    Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2013, pp. 222, 224.

[^171]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*.

[^172]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 224.

[^173]: See J. Altman, ‘Development Options on Aboriginal Land:
    Sustainable Indigenous Hybrid Economies in the Twenty-First Century’
    in L. Taylor, G. Ward, G. Henderson, R. Davis and L. Wallis (eds)
    *The Power of Knowledge, the Resonance of Tradition,* Canberra:
    Aboriginal Studies Press, 2005.

[^174]: The young woman in the story opening this chapter made a wall
    poster from an online article about her grandfather’s days as a
    stockman.

[^175]: In January 2014, ABC news reported that the community of Haasts
    Bluff had started fundraising to erect a 20-meter high neon crucifix
    on a hill, with an estimated cost of \$1.2 million. G. Liston,
    ‘Remote Community Hopes to Erect Giant Neon Crucifix’,
    http://www.abc.net.au/news/2008-09-25/fiery-debate-over-dpp-decision/521100.

[^176]: P. Olsen, ‘Teenagers Say Goodbye to Facebook and Hello to
    Messenger Apps’, *The Guardian*, 10 November 2013.

[^177]: Divas Chat is a dating and messaging service owned by Canadian
    company airG and contracted to Telstra. It is popular amongst
    remote-living Aboriginal people as it can be accessed from a phone
    that has run out of credit. Debt accrued through subscription to
    airG (95c a day) is then deducted from the user’s Telstra credit
    when the mobile is recharged.

[^178]: L. Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report,* Alice Springs: Northern
    Territory Library and Central Australian Youth Link Up Service,
    2014, p. 10.

[^179]: This finding differs somewhat to Iten’s (2014); however, Iten
    interviewed a smaller sample and did not include ‘nil’ responses.

[^180]: M. Balogh, ‘Indigenous Australia Addicted to Facebook’, news
    release, 26 August 2014.

[^181]: B. Carlson, ‘The “New Frontier”: Emergent Indigenous Identities
    and Social Media’, in M. Harris, M. Nakata and B. Carlson (eds) *The
    Politics of Identity: Emerging Indigeneity*, Sydney: University of
    Technology Sydney E-Press, 2013.

[^182]: In early 2016, Indigitube was not available and the site was
    redirecting to ICTV Play, a video-on-demand service for the remote
    Indigenous community television service, ICTV.

[^183]: Barkly Arts, 8 August 2014. In fact, mobile phone charging uses
    a trivial amount of power.

[^184]: Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA),
    ‘Cybersmart Parents: Connecting Parents to Cyber-Safety Resources’,
    Canberra: Australian Media and Communications Authority, 2010, p. 6.

[^185]: ACMA, ‘Cybersmart Parents: Connecting Parents to Cyber-Safety
    Resources’, p. 6.

[^186]: ACMA, ‘Cybersmart Parents: Connecting Parents to Cyber-Safety
    Resources’, p. 52.

[^187]: S. Livingstone and L. Haddon, *EU Kids Online: Final Report,*
    London: EU Kids Online, 2009.

    L. Green, D. Brady, K. Olafsson, J. Hartley and C. Lumby, ‘Risks and
    Safety for Australian Children on the Internet: Full Findings from
    the Au Kids Online Survey of 9-16 Year Olds and Their Parents’,
    *Cultural Science Journal* 4.1 (2011).

    Joint Select Committee on Cyber-Safety, ‘High-Wire Act: Cyber-Safety
    and the Young’, *Interim Report,* Canberra, 2011.

[^188]: G. Shaw, G. Shaw and P. D'Abbs, *Community Safety and Wellbeing
    Research Study: Consolidated Report,* Canberra: Department of
    Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, 2011,
    pp. 8-9.

[^189]: L. Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report,* Alice Springs: Northern
    Territory Library and Central Australian Youth Link Up Service,
    2014.

[^190]: Central Land Council (CLC), ‘Divas Chat Causing Social Chaos’,
    *Land Rights News*, Alice Springs: Central Land Council, 2012, pp.
    4-6.

    Human Rights Equal Opportunity Commission, *Social Justice Report
    2011,* Sydney: Commonwealth of Australia, 2011.

[^191]: See E. Hogan, ‘Beyond the Mulga Curtain’, *Inside Story*, 2014.

    E. Hogan, E. Rennie, A. Crouch, A. Wright, R. Gregory and J. Thomas,
    *Submission to the Inquiry into Issues Surrounding Cyber-Safety for
    Indigenous Australians*, Brisbane: ARC Centre of Excellence for
    Creative Industries and Innovation, Queensland University of
    Technology, 2013.

[^192]: G. Cowlishaw, ‘A New Protection Policy?’, *Inside Story*, 2013.

[^193]: Shaw, Shaw and D'Abbs, *Community Safety and Wellbeing Research
    Study: Consolidated Report*, p. 82, 106.

[^194]: Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report*, p. 9, 12.

[^195]: Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report*, p. 12.

[^196]: CLC, ‘Divas Chat Causing Social Chaos’, pp. 4-6.

[^197]: I. Kral, ‘Youth Media as Cultural Practice: Remote Indigenous
    Youth Speaking out Loud’, *Australian Aboriginal Studies* 1 (2011).

[^198]: S. Livingstone, ‘Taking Risky Opportunities in Youthful Content
    Creation: Teenagers' Use of Social Networking Sites for Intimacy,
    Privacy and Self-Expression’, *New Media & Society* 10.3 (2008):
    395.

[^199]: M. Ito, J. Antin, M. Finn, A. Law, A. Manion, S. Mitnick, D.
    Schlossberg, S. Yardi and H. A. Horst, *Hanging out, Messing around,
    and Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with New Media,*
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009.

[^200]: The Council was not running in 2015, as its funding had ceased,
    although informal arrangements were in place.

[^201]: Hogan, ‘Beyond the Mulga Curtain’.

    Hogan et al., *Submission to the Inquiry into Issues Surrounding
    Cyber-Safety for Indigenous Australians*.

[^202]: Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report*, p. 12.

[^203]: Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report*, p. 16.

[^204]: M. Ananny, ‘From Noxious to Public? Tracing Ethical Dynamics of
    Social Media Platform Conversions’, *Social Media + Society* 1.1
    (2015).

[^205]: Selwyn, Gorard and Furlong, ‘Whose Internet Is It Anyway?
    Exploring Adults’ (Non) Use of the Internet in Everyday Life’, p.
    13.

[^206]: Selwyn, Gorard and Furlong, ‘Whose Internet Is It Anyway?
    Exploring Adults’ (Non) Use of the Internet in Everyday Life’.

[^207]: The Murray Downs school had an attendance rate of around 75 per
    cent in 2013 and 2014^,^ although enrolments had dwindled to 23
    students in 2014, down from the 43 in 2010.

    Northern Territory Department of Education, ‘Enrolment and
    Attendance Statistics’,
    http://www.education.nt.gov.au/students/at-school/enrolment-attendance/enrolment-attendance-statistics/2013-enrolment-and-attendance-statistics.

[^208]: One Education was known as ‘One Laptop per Child Australia’ at
    that time. Co-author Ellie Rennie, together with education
    technology researcher Sarah Howard, conducted a survey of schools
    within the One Education system as part of evaluations for the
    Department of Education (see S. Howard and E. Rennie, ‘Free for All:
    A Case Study Examining Implementation Factors of One-to-One Device
    Programs’, *Computers in the Schools,* 30.4 (2013): 359-377. Prior
    to the 2012 Department of Education funding, 1 in 3 of the 160
    schools participating in the program were Indigenous schools, in
    that at least 75 per cent of the students were Indigenous. In 2015,
    despite the program’s expansion, a quarter of schools involved in
    the One Education program were Indigenous schools. One Education
    provides child-sized, robust laptops (that can be converted into a
    tablet) to classrooms once the teachers have participated in an
    online training program.

[^209]: M. Warschauer and T. Matuchniak, ‘New Technology and Digital
    Worlds: Analyzing Evidence of Equity in Access, Use, and Outcomes’,
    *Review of Research in Education* 34.1 (2010): 180.

[^210]: R.W. Fairlie, D.O. Beltran and K.K. Das, ‘Home Computers and
    Educational Outcomes: Evidence from the Nlsy97 and Cps\*’, *Economic
    Inquiry* 48.3 (2010).

[^211]: Howard and Rennie, ‘Free for All: A Case Study Examining
    Implementation Factors of One-to-One Device Programs’.

[^212]: S. Harris and J. Kinslow-Harris, *Culture and Learning:
    Tradition and Education in North-East Arnhem Land,* Canberra:
    Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
    Studies, 1980.

    P. Hughes and A.J. More, *Aboriginal Ways of Learning,* Adelaide:
    Paul Hughes, 2004.

    P. Hughes and A.J. More, ‘Aboriginal Ways of Learning and Learning
    Styles’, Brisbane: *Australian Association for Research in
    Education,* 1997.

    J.A. Robinson and R.M. Nichol, ‘Building Bridges between Aboriginal
    and Western Mathematics: Creating an Effective Mathematics Learning
    Environment’, *Education in Rural Australia* 8.2 (1998).

[^213]: M. Battiste, *Indigenous Knowledge and Pedagogy in First Nations
    Education: A Literature Review with Recommendations,* Ottawa:
    Apamuwek Institute, 2002, pp. 15, 18.

[^214]: T. Yunkaporta, ‘Aboriginal Pedagogies at the Cultural
    Interface’, Professional Doctorate (Research) thesis, James Cook
    University, Townsville, Qld (2009).

[^215]: J. Byrnes, ‘Aboriginal Learning Styles and Adult Education: Is a
    Synthesis Possible’, *Australian Journal of Adult and Community
    Education* 33.3 (1993).

    M. Donovan, ‘Can Information Communication Technological Tools Be
    Used to Suit Aboriginal Learning Pedagogies’, *Information
    Technology and Indigenous people* (2007), p. 96.

    M. Eady and S. Woodcock, ‘Understanding the Need: Using
    Collaboratively Created Draft Guiding Principles to Direct Online
    Synchronous Learning in Indigenous Communities’, *International
    Journal for Educational Integrity* 6.2 (2010).

    I. Kral and I. Falk, *What Is All That Learning For? Indigenous
    Adult English Literacy Practices, Training, Community Capacity and
    Health*, Adelaide: NCVER, 2004, p. 56.

    M. Malin and D. Maidment, ‘Evaluation of Irrkerlantye Learning
    Centre’ (unpublished report), Darwin: Cooperative Research Centre
    for Aboriginal and Tropical Health (2003), p. 97.

    Northern Territory Department of Education, *Learning Lessons: An
    Independent Review of Indigenous Education in the Northern
    Territory*, Darwin: Northern Territory Department of Education,
    1999,
    http://www.education.nt.gov.au/\_\_data/assets/pdf\_file/0005/7475/learning\_lessons\_review.pdf.

    T. Yunkaporta, *Aboriginal Pedagogies at the Cultural Interface*.

    A. Mahon, ‘Deadly Dreaming: Bi-Cultural Strategies for Working with
    Indigenous Adults in Education’, Australian Council for Adult
    Literacy conference, Surfers Paradise, Australia, 3-4 October, 2008,
    http://www.acal.edu.au/conference/08/Deadly\_Dreaming\_Mahon.pdf.

[^216]: For example: I. Kral and I. Falk, *What Is All That Learning
    For? Indigenous Adult English Literacy Practices, Training,
    Community Capacity and Health*, p. 41

[^217]: M. Donovan, ‘Is It a Digital Divide Because Its' No Good When
    Talking from an Aboriginal Point? Giving Aboriginal Design to
    Educational Practices’,
    http://www.persons.org.uk/ci/mm/nmtc/nmtc2/donovan%20paper.pdf.

    N. Harrison, ‘Teaching and Learning in Aboriginal Education’,
    (2011), p. 53, 54.

[^218]: O'Donogue 1992 and Steen 1997, as cited in Donovan, ‘Can
    Information Communication Technological Tools Be Used to Suit
    Aboriginal Learning Pedagogies?’.

[^219]: M. Eady and S. Woodcock, ‘Understanding the Need: Using
    Collaboratively Created Draft Guiding Principles to Direct Online
    Synchronous Learning in Indigenous Communities’, *International
    Journal for Educational Integrity* 6.2 (2010): 964.

[^220]: A. Crouch, *Home Internet for Remote Indigenous Communities:
    Technical Report*, p. 39.

[^221]: McCallugh cited in Daniel Featherstone, ‘The Aboriginal
    Invention of Broadband: How Yarnangu Are Using Icts in the
    Ngaanyatjarra Lands of Western Australia’, in Lyndon Ormond-Parker,
    Aaron Corn, Cressida Fforde, Kazuko Obata and Sandy O’Sullivan,
    *Information Technologies and Indigenous Communities*, , 27-52.
    Canberra: AIATSIS Research Publications, 2013, p. 43.

[^222]: S. Weber and S. Dixon, *Growing up Online: Young People and
    Digital Technologies*, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007, p. 256.

[^223]: W.H. Dutton, A. Shepherd and C. Di Gennaro, ‘Digital Divides and
    Choices Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns
    of Internet Diffusion and Use’ in B. Anderson, M. Brynin, Y. Raban
    and J. Gershuny (eds) *Information and Communication Technologies in
    Society E-Living in a Digital Europe,* London: Routledge, 2007, p.
    37.

[^224]: S. Huyer and T. Sikoska, *Overcoming the Gender Digital Divide:
    Understanding Icts and Their Potential for the Empowerment of
    Women,* Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic: UN-INSTRAW, 2003, pp. 2,
    12.

    A. Thas, C. Ramilo and C. Cinoco, ‘Gender and ICT’, *UNDP
    Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme E-Primer,* New Delhi:
    Elsevier, 2007, p. 2.

[^225]: Dutton, Shepherd and Di Gennaro, ‘Digital Divides and Choices
    Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns of
    Internet Diffusion and Use’, p. 42.

[^226]: See for example: D. Bell, *Daughters of the Dreaming,*
    Melbourne: Allen and Unwin, 1983.

    G. Cowlishaw, ‘Infanticide in Aboriginal Australia’, *Oceania* 48.4
    (1978): 262-283.

    G. Cowlishaw, ‘Socialisation and Subordination among Australian
    Aborigines’ *Man* 17.3 (September, 1982): 492-507.

    G. Cowlishaw, *Women's Realm: A Study of Socialization, Sexuality
    and Reproduction among Australian Aborigines,* PhD diss., University
    of Sydney, Australia, 1979.

    A. Hamilton, ‘A Complex Strategical Situation: Gender and Power in
    Aboriginal Australia’ in N. Grieve and P. Grimshaw (eds) *Australian
    Imjmen: Feminist Perspectives,* Melbourne: Oxford University Press,
    1981.

    P. M. Kaberry, *Aboriginal Women,* London: George Routledge and Sons
    Pty Ltd, 1939.

[^227]: F. Merlan, ‘Gender in Aboriginal Society: A Review’ in R. M.
    Berndt and R. Tonkinson (eds) *Social Anthropology and Australian
    Aboriginal Studies*, Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press, 1988, p.
    20.

[^228]: Merlan, ‘Gender in Aboriginal Society: A Review’, p. 29.

[^229]: Cowlishaw, ‘Infanticide in Aboriginal Australia’.

    Cowlishaw, ‘Socialisation and Subordination among Australian
    Aborigines’.

    Cowlishaw, *Women's Realm: A Study of Socialization, Sexuality and
    Reproduction among Australian Aborigines*.

    Hamilton, ‘A Complex Strategical Situation: Gender and Power in
    Aboriginal Australia’.

    D. Bell, *Daughters of the Dreaming,* Melbourne: Allen and Unwin,
    1983.

    Kaberry, *Aboriginal Women*.

[^230]: Merlan, ‘Gender in Aboriginal Society: A Review’ p. 30.

    cf. Macdonald, ‘Economies and Personhood: Demand Sharing among the
    Wiradjuri of New South Wales’.

    N. Peterson, ‘Demand Sharing: Reciprocity and the Pressure for
    Generosity among Foragers’, *American Anthropologist* 95.4 (1993).

    G. Robinson, ‘Families, Generations, and Self: Conflict, Loyalty,
    and Recognition in an Australian Aboriginal Society’, *Ethos* 25.3
    (1997): 304.

[^231]: McClintock 1995 as cited in Merlan, ‘Gender in Aboriginal
    Society: A Review’ p. 30.

[^232]: McClintock 1995 as cited in J. Lydon, ‘‘‘Our Sense of Beauty”:
    Visuality, Space and Gender on Victoria’s Aboriginal Reserves,
    South‐Eastern Australia’, *History and Anthropology* 16.2 (2005):
    222.

[^233]: Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report*, p. 9.

[^234]: Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report*, p. 16.

[^235]: Iten, *Cyber Safety Program Report*, p. 16.

[^236]: Karen moved from Mungalawarru to Tennant Creek once her oldest
    child turned five, to support him while he attended school.

[^237]: Myers, *Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self: Sentiment, Place and
    Politics among Western Desert Aborigines*, p. 145.

[^238]: Myers, *Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self: Sentiment, Place and
    Politics among Western Desert Aborigines*, p. 238.

[^239]: K. W. Seemann, M. Parnell, S. McFallan and S. Tucker, *Housing
    for Livelihoods: The Lifecycle of Housing and Infrastructure through
    a Whole-of-System Approach in Remote Aboriginal Settlements* Vol.
    29, Alice Springs: Desert Knowledge CRC, 2008, p. 16.

[^240]: Seemann et al., *Housing for Livelihoods: The Lifecycle of
    Housing and Infrastructure through a Whole-of-System Approach in
    Remote Aboriginal Settlements*, p. 17.

[^241]: Seemann et al, *Housing for Livelihoods: The Lifecycle of
    Housing and Infrastructure through a Whole-of-System Approach in
    Remote Aboriginal Settlements*, pp. 17-18.

[^242]: Seemann et al., *Housing for Livelihoods: The Lifecycle of
    Housing and Infrastructure through a Whole-of-System Approach in
    Remote Aboriginal Settlements*, p. 18.

[^243]: Merlan, ‘Gender in Aboriginal Society: A Review’, p. 36.

[^244]: Australian Communications and Media Authority, ‘Communications
    Report 2009-10’,
    http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/\_assets/main/lib311995/2009-10\_comms\_report-complete.pdf,
    p. 27.

[^245]: Central Australian Youth Link Up Service, *Annual Attendance
    Trends Data: July*, 2010.

[^246]: McFarland 2013, personal communication.

[^247]: With the exception of the Central Land Council (CLC).

[^248]: The research involved interviews with approximately 100 people
    in Ali Curung in late 2013, with representation from half of all
    households.

[^249]: The Broadband for the Bush network is the one forum where this
    occurs (www.broadbandforthebush.com.au). All four partners in the
    Home Internet Project were involved in Broadband for the Bush during
    the life of the project, for the purposes of knowledge sharing and
    capacity building.

[^250]: A. Gray, personal communication, 3 July 2013.

[^251]: Communities with Telstra mobile coverage in the region as of
    August 2015: Ali Curung, Ampilawatja, Arlpara, Ti Tree, Yuendumu,
    Papunya, Hermannsburg, Mutitjulu, Santa Teresa, Lajamanu, Elliot,
    and Newcastle Waters, as well as the townships of Alice Springs and
    Tennant Creek, including town camps. The community of Amoonguna had
    coverage due to its proximity to Alice Springs. Other non-community
    sites included Granites mine, Barkly homestead/Wayside Inn, Barrow
    Creek, Urapunja power station, and the Erldunda road house.

    Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Macdonnel and Barkly Statistical
    Area 3, Indigenous Profile, by Household’,
    www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home.

[^252]: Ampilatwatja, Arlparra, Newcastle Waters, Papunya and Mutijulu.
    Mutijulu had some coverage prior to this due to its proximity to
    Yulara (Uluru tourist township).

[^253]: Australian Communications and Media Authority, ‘Communications
    Report 2009-10’,
    http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/\_assets/main/lib311995/2009-10\_comms\_report-complete.pdf.

[^254]: Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council,
    *Ingerrekenhe Antirrkweme: Mobile Phone Use among Low Income
    Aboriginal People - a Central Australian Snapshot*, Alice Springs:
    Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council, 2007, p.
    6.

[^255]: F.R. Brady, L.E. Dyson and T. Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of
    Mobile Phones and Oral Culture’, Cultural Attitudes Towards
    Technology and Communications, Murdoch University, Perth, 2008, p.
    393.

[^256]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones
    and Oral Culture’, pp. 393-4.

[^257]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones
    and Oral Culture’, p. 396.

[^258]: Brady, Dyson and Asela, ‘Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones
    and Oral Culture’, p. 396.

[^259]: I. Razak, ‘Telstra Accused of Ripping Off Aborigines’, *ABC
    News*, http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2009/09/09/2680645.

[^260]: E. Sleath and N. Maloney, ‘Mobile Phone Hotspots Trialled in the
    Outback’, *ABC News*,
    http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2015/03/16/4198439.htm.

[^261]: Endaga sales material, endaga.com.

[^262]: ‘DIY Telecoms’, *The Economist* (March 7 2015*)*,
    http://www.economist.com/news/technology-quarterly/21645498-fed-up-failings-big-operators-remote-mexican-communities-are-acting.

[^263]: Rhizomatica, ‘About’, http://rhizomatica.org/about-2/.

[^264]: T. Hatt, K. Okeleke and M. Meloan, ‘Closing the Coverage Gap - a
    View from Asia’, *GSMA Intelligence* (June 2015*)*,
    https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=e245c423854fcfd38eeae0a918cc91c8&download.

[^265]: G. Goggin and J. Clark. ‘Mobile Phones and Community
    Development: A Contact Zone between Media and Citizenship’,
    *Development in Practice* 19:4-5 (2009): 595.

[^266]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^267]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^268]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^269]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 72.

[^270]: Doron and Jeffrey, *The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap
    Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life*, p. 74.

[^271]: H. Galperin, and F. Bar, ‘The Microtelco Opportunity: Evidence
    from Latin America’, *Information Technologies & International
    Development* 3.2 (2006): 73.

[^272]: H. Galperin and J. Mariscal, ‘Digital Poverty: Latin American
    and Caribbean Perspectives’, *Practical Publishing* (2007),
    http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Resources/Publications/openebooks/342-3/index.html,
    p. 96.

[^273]: Such as the O3B non-geostationary satellites (backed by Google
    and other investors), which orbit close to earth and therefore offer
    low latency speeds – making voice connections acceptable – and fast
    loading for data services. O3B was designed to serve the ‘Other 3
    Billion’ who do not have internet connections, and is providing
    satellite backhaul for mobile broadband in countries such as the
    Solomon Islands.

[^274]: S. Corner, ‘Universal Telecommunications Services: A Brief
    History and Analysis of the Issues Surrounding the New Australian
    Legislation on the Universal Service Obligation’,
    *Telecommunications Journal of Australia* 62.2 (2012): 22.

[^275]: Corner, ‘Universal Telecommunications Services: A Brief History
    and Analysis of the Issues Surrounding the New Australian
    Legislation on the Universal Service Obligation’.

    S. Davies, *Urban Based Support for Rural and Remote Australian
    Telecommunications*, Broadband for the Bush Alliance, 2014.

[^276]: K.R. Wilson, J.S. Wallin and C. Reiser, ‘Social Stratification
    and the Digital Divide’, *Social Science Computer Review* 21.2
    (2003).

    J. Van Dijk and K. Hacker, ‘The Digital Divide as a Complex and
    Dynamic Phenomenon’, *The Information Society* 19.4 (2003).

    Norris, Pippa. ‘The Worldwide Digital Divide’, Annual Meeting of the
    Political Studies Association of the UK, London School of Economics
    and Political Science, 2000.

    N. Selwyn, ‘Reconsidering Political and Popular Understandings of
    the Digital Divide’, *New Media & Society* 6.3 (2004).

[^277]: Dutton, Shepherd C. Di Gennaro, ‘Digital Divides and Choices
    Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns of
    Internet Diffusion and Use’.

[^278]: Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage
    and the Information Society*, p. 9.

[^279]: Dutton, Shepherd and Di Gennaro, ‘Digital Divides and Choices
    Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns of
    Internet Diffusion and Use’, p. 33.

[^280]: N. Biddle, *CAEPR Indigenous Population Project 2011 Census
    Papers*, Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy
    Research, 2013.

[^281]: Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Patterns of Internet Access in
    Australia’,
    http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/8146.0.55.001/.

[^282]: Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Patterns of Internet Access in
    Australia’.

[^283]: It is possible to do this analysis by aggregating populations at
    a more nuanced level by mobile reception coordinates rather than
    ILOCs. However, Telstra was unable to provide accurate coordinates
    for mobile coverage in 2011.

[^284]: Peculiarities in the data relating to the type of internet
    connection are likely to have been the result of the way in which
    the survey was administered. The census is completed in remote
    communities with the assistance of ABS staff, who administer the
    survey door-to-door, whereas elsewhere it is completed by household
    members either online or on paper. The census asked residents what
    type of internet connection was available at the dwelling. The
    options included ‘broadband’, ‘dial-up’ and ‘other’, with an
    explanatory note that ‘other’ includes ‘internet access through
    mobile phones etc’. However, in Santa Teresa, a community with
    mobile coverage, no dwellings were identified as having an ‘other’
    internet connection, while thirty houses chose ‘not stated’. In
    Yuendumu, twenty-seven houses stated that they had an ‘other’
    connection and only three were not stated. There are a number of
    possible explanations for these inconsistencies, including whether
    the question was adequately explained to the participant, as well as
    confusion as to whether individual access to the internet via a
    mobile device is considered to belong to a dwelling or not. Despite
    these discrepancies, when grouped into ILOCs with mobile coverage
    and those without, the differences in internet adoption appear to be
    statistically significant.

[^285]: Rennie et al., ‘At Home on the Outstation: Barriers to Home
    Internet in Remote Indigenous Communities’, p. 590.

[^286]: Central Australian Youth Link Up Service, *Proposal Re: Better
    Way of Providing Broadband in Remote Communities*, Alice Springs:
    Tangentyere Council, 2014.

[^287]: Rennie et al., ‘At Home on the Outstation: Barriers to Home
    Internet in Remote Indigenous Communities’, pp. 591.

    Hogan et al., *Submission to the Inquiry into Issues Surrounding
    Cyber-Safety for Indigenous Australians*.

[^288]: J. Finlayson and A.J. Auld, ‘Shoe or Stew?: Balancing Wants and
    Needs in Indigenous Households: A Study of Appropriate Income
    Support Payments and Policies for Families’, ANU Centre for
    Aboriginal Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 182, 1999.

    D.E. Smith, *Toward an Aboriginal Household Expenditure Survey:
    Conceptual, Methodological and Cultural Considerations*, Canberra:
    ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 1991, p. 13.

[^289]: M. Hilbert, ‘The End Justifies the Definition: The Manifold
    Outlooks on the Digital Divide and Their Practical Usefulness for
    Policy-Making’, *Telecommunications Policy* 35.8 (2011): 718.

[^290]: F. Brady, L.E. Dyson and Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council,
    *Report to Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council on Mobile Technology
    in the Bloomfield River Valley*, 2009, p. 396.

[^291]: Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage
    and the Information Society*.

[^292]: Helsper, *Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage
    and the Information Society,* p. 10-11.

[^293]: P.E. Earl, ‘Economics and Psychology: A Survey’, *The Economic
    Journal* 100.402 (1990).

[^294]: M.S. Granovetter, ‘The Strength of Weak Ties’, *American Journal
    of Sociology* 78.6 (1973).

[^295]: M. Woolcock and D. Narayan, ‘Social Capital: Implications for
    Development Theory, Research, and Policy’, *The World Bank Research
    Observer* 15.2 (2000).

[^296]: Kral, ‘Youth Media as Cultural Practice: Remote Indigenous Youth
    Speaking out Loud’.

[^297]: B. Crump, and A. McIlroy, ‘The Digital Divide: Why the
    "Don't-Want-Tos" Won't Compute: Lessons from a New Zealand ICT
    Project, *First Monday* 8.12 (2003).

[^298]: B. Hunter, ‘Indigenous Social Exclusion: Insights and Challenges
    for the Concept of Social Inclusion’, *Family Matters*, 82 (2009):
    52.

[^299]: With the exception of the Central Land Council (CLC).

[^300]: The research involved interviews with approximately 100 people
    in Ali Curung in late 2013, with representation from half of all
    households.

[^301]: The Broadband for the Bush network is the one forum where this
    occurs (www.broadbandforthebush.com.au). All four partners in the
    Home Internet Project were involved in Broadband for the Bush during
    the life of the project, for the purposes of knowledge sharing and
    capacity building.
