<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8" />
  <meta name="generator" content="pandoc" />
  <title>Bibliography</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="stylesheet.css" />
</head>
<body>
<section id="bibliography" class="level1">
<h1>Bibliography</h1>
<p>Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Committee. ‘Everybody’s Business: Remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Community Stores’, Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia, 2009.</p>
<p>Altman, J.C., M.C. Dillon and K. Jordan. ‘Submission to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs Inquiry into Community Stores in Remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Communities’, <em>CAEPR Topical Issue No. 04/2009,</em> Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2009.</p>
<p>Altman, J. ‘Development Options on Aboriginal Land: Sustainable Indigenous Hybrid Economies in the Twenty-First Century’, in L. Taylor, G. Ward, G. Henderson, R. Davis and L. Wallis (eds) <em>The Power of Knowledge, the Resonance of Tradition</em>, Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press, 2005.</p>
<p>———. ‘A Genealogy of “Demand Sharing”: From Pure Anthropology to Public Policy’, in Y. Musharbash and M. Barber (eds) <em>Ethnography and the Production of Anthropological Knowledge: Essays in Honour of Nicolas Peterson</em>, ANU E Press, 2011, pp. 187-200.</p>
<p>———. <em>In Search of an Outstations Policy for Indigenous Australians,</em> Canberra: Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2006.</p>
<p>Amnesty International. <em>The Land Holds Us: Aboriginal Peoples’ Right to Traditional Homelands in the Northern Territory</em>, Broadway, NSW: Amnesty International, 2011.</p>
<p>Ananny, M. ‘From Noxious to Public? Tracing Ethical Dynamics of Social Media Platform Conversions’, <em>Social Media + Society</em> 1.1 (2015): 1-3.</p>
<p>Anderson, B. and K. Tracey. ‘Digital Living: The Impact (or Otherwise) of the Internet on Everday British Life’ in C. Haythornthwaite and B. Wellman (eds) <em>The Internet in Everyday Life</em>, Malden, MA, USA: Blackwell Publishers Ltd, 2002, pp. 139-163.</p>
<p>ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation. ‘World Internet Project (Australia)’, <a href="http://www.cci.edu.au/projects/world-internet-project-australia"><em>http://www.cci.edu.au/projects/world-internet-project-australia</em></a>.</p>
<p>Austin-Broos, D. <em>A Different Inequality: The Politics of Debate About Remote Aboriginal Australia</em> [Kindle Dx Version], Sydney: Allen &amp; Unwin, 2011.</p>
<p>Australian Bureau of Statistics. ‘Australia, Remote and Very Remote (Remoteness Factor), Indigenous Profile, by Household’, <a href="http://www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home"><em>www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home</em></a>.</p>
<p>———. ‘Census of Population and Housing – Counts of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples’, <a href="http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/2075.0main+features32011"><em>http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/2075.0main+features32011</em></a>.</p>
<p>———. ‘Housing and Infrastructure in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Communities’, <a href="http://www.abs.gov.au/Ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/4710.0Main%20Features42006?opendocument&amp;tabname=Summary&amp;prodno=4710.0&amp;issue=2006&amp;num=&amp;view"><em>http://www.abs.gov.au/Ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/4710.0Main%20Features42006?opendocument&amp;tabname=Summary&amp;prodno=4710.0&amp;issue=2006&amp;num=&amp;view</em></a>.</p>
<p>———. ‘Macdonnel and Barkly Statistical Area 3, Indigenous Profile, by Houshold’, http://abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home.</p>
<p>———. ‘Patterns of Internet Access in Australia’, <a href="http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/8146.0.55.001/"><em>http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/8146.0.55.001/</em></a><a href="">.</a></p>
<p>Australian Communications and Media Authority. ‘Communications Report 2009-10’, <a href="http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/_assets/main/lib311995/2009-10_comms_report-complete.pdf"><em>http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/_assets/main/lib311995/2009-10_comms_report-complete.pdf</em></a><a href="">.</a></p>
<p>———. ‘Communications Report 2012-13’. Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia, 2013.</p>
<p>———. ‘Cybersmart Parents: Connecting Parents to Cyber-Safety Resources’, Canberra: Australian Media and Communications Authority, 2010.</p>
<p>———. ‘The Internet Service Market and Australians in the Online Environment’, Canberra, 2011.</p>
<p>———. ‘Telecommunications in Remote Indigenous Communications’, <a href="http://www.acma.gov.au/theACMA/telecommunications-in-remote-indigenous-communities"><em>http://www.acma.gov.au/theACMA/telecommunications-in-remote-indigenous-communities</em></a>.</p>
<p>Australian Financial Counselling and Credit Reform Association. ‘ATM Fees in Indigenous Communities’, <em>AFCCRA</em>, <a href="http://www.afccra.org/media%20releases%20documents/ATM%20Fees%20in%20Remote%20Indigenous%20Communities.pdf"><em>http://www.afccra.org/media%20releases%20documents/ATM%20Fees%20in%20Remote%20Indigenous%20Communities.pdf</em></a>.</p>
<p>Australian Human Rights Commission. <em>Social Justice Report 2011</em>, Sydney: Commonwealth of Australia, 2011.</p>
<p>Australian Private Networks. <em>Indigenous Communications Program: Final Report</em>, 2014.</p>
<p>Balogh, M. ‘Indigenous Australia Addicted to Facebook’, news release, 26 August 2014.</p>
<p>Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo. ‘Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty’, <em>Population and Development Review</em> 374 (2011): 796-797.</p>
<p>Bath, J. and N. Biddle. ‘Measures of Indigenous Wellbeing and Their Determinants Across the Lifecourse’, CAEPR Lecture Series, ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2011.</p>
<p>Battiste, M. <em>Indigenous Knowledge and Pedagogy in First Nations Education: A Literature Review with Recommendations</em>, Ottawa: Apamuwek Institute, 2002.</p>
<p>Batty, P. <em>Governing Cultural Difference: The Incorporation of the Aboriginal Subject into the Mechanisms of Government with Reference to the Development of Aboriginal Radio and Television in Central Australia</em>, PhD diss., University of South Australia, Adelaide, 2003.</p>
<p>Beadman, B. ‘“A Tortuous Trail”: Bob Beadman’s Short History of Outstations’, <em>Alice Online: Australia from the Inside Out…</em>, <a href="http://aliceonline.com.au/2011/10/17/a-tortuous-trail-bob-beadmans-short-history-of-outstations/"><em>http://aliceonline.com.au/2011/10/17/a-tortuous-trail-bob-beadmans-short-history-of-outstations/</em></a>.</p>
<p>Bell, D. <em>Daughters of the Dreaming</em>, Melbourne: Allen and Unwin, 1983.</p>
<p>Best, M.L. and C.M. Maclay. ‘Community Internet Access in Rural Areas: Solving the Economic Sustainability Puzzle’ in G.S. Kirkman, P.K. Cornelius, J.D. Sachs and K. Schwab (eds) <em>The Global Information Technology Report: Readiness for the Networked World</em>, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002, pp. 76-89.</p>
<p>Biddle, N. ‘Income’, Paper 11: <em>CAEPR Indigenous Population Project 2011 Census Papers,</em> Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2013.</p>
<p>Blanchard, C.A. <em>Return to Country: The Aboriginal Homelands Movement in Australia</em>, Canberra: The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs, 1987.</p>
<p>Brady, F.R., L.E. Dyson and T. Asela. <em>Indigenous Adoption of Mobile Phones and Oral Culture</em>, Cultural Attitudes Towards Communication and Technology, Perth: Murdoch University, 2008.</p>
<p>Brady, F., L.E. Dyson and Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council. <em>Report to Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council on Mobile Technology in the Bloomfield River Valley</em>, 2009.</p>
<p>Brasche, I. and I. Harrington. ‘Promoting Teacher Quality and Continuity: Tackling the Disadvantages of Remote Indigenous Schools in the Northern Territory’, <em>Australian Journal of Education</em> 56.2 (2012): 110-125.</p>
<p>Broadband for the Bush Alliance. <em>Rethinking the Indigenous Communications Program,</em> policy paper, 2013.</p>
<p>Brown, S. A., V. Venkatesh and H. Bala. ‘Household Technology Use: Integrating Household Life Cycle and the Model of Adoption of Technology in Households’, <em>The Information Society</em> 22.4 (2006): 205-218.</p>
<p>Byrnes, J. ‘Aboriginal Learning Styles and Adult Education: Is a Synthesis Possible?’, <em>Australian Journal of Adult and Community Education</em> 33.3 (1993): 157-171.</p>
<p>Carlson, B. ‘The “New Frontier”: Emergent Indigenous Identities and Social Media’ in M. Harris, M. Nakata and B. Carlson (eds) <em>The Politics of Identity: Emerging Indigeneity</em>, Sydney: University of Technology Sydney E-Press, 2013, pp. 147-168.</p>
<p>Central Australian Youth Link Up Service. ‘Annual Attendance Trends Data: July’, 2010.</p>
<p>———. ‘Papunya Computer Room’, <a href="http://caylus.org.au/papunya-computer-room/"><em>http://caylus.org.au/papunya-computer-room/</em></a>.</p>
<p>———. ‘Proposal Re: Better Way of Providing Broadband in Remote Communities’, Alice Springs: Tangentyere Council, 2014.</p>
<p>Central Land Council (CLC). ‘Divas Chat Causing Social Chaos’, <em>Land Rights News,</em> Alice Springs: Central Land Council, 2012, pp. 4-6</p>
<p>Chakravartty, P. ‘Rebranding Development Communications in Emergent India’, <em>Nordicom Review</em> 33 (Special Issue) (2012): 65-76.</p>
<p>Coalition. ‘The Coalition’s Policy for E-Government and the Digital Economy’, Canberra, 2013.</p>
<p>Commonwealth of Australia. ‘Budget Paper No. 2: Expense Measures: A New Remote Indigenous Housing Strategy’, <a href="http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/bp2/html/bp2_expense-19.htm"><em>http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/bp2/html/bp2_expense-19.htm</em></a>.</p>
<p>———. ‘Budget: Indigenous Partnerships’, <a href="http://www.budget.gov.au/2005-06/ministerial/html/dotars-12.htm"><em>http://www.budget.gov.au/2005-06/ministerial/html/dotars-12.htm</em></a>.</p>
<p>Corner, S. ‘Universal Telecommunications Services: A Brief History and Analysis of the Issues Surrounding the New Australian Legislation on the Universal Service Obligation’, <em>Telecommunications Journal of Australia</em> 62.2 (2012).</p>
<p>Correa, T. and I. Pavez. <em>Digital Inclusion in Rural Areas: A Qualitative Exploration of Challenges Faced by People from Isolated Communities</em>, International Communications Association Conference, San Juan, 2015.</p>
<p>Cowlishaw, G. ‘Infanticide in Aboriginal Australia’, <em>Oceania</em> (1978): 262-283.</p>
<p>———. ‘A New Protection Policy?’, <em>Inside Story</em>, 2013, <a href="http://insidestory.org.au/a-new-protection-policy/"><em>http://insidestory.org.au/a-new-protection-policy/</em></a>.</p>
<p>———. ‘Socialization and Subordination Among Australian Aborigines’, <em>Man</em> (1982): 492-507.</p>
<p>———. <em>Women’s Realm: A Study of Socialization, Sexuality and Reproduction Among Australian Aborigines</em>, PhD diss., University of Sydney, Sydney, 1979.</p>
<p>Crouch, A. ‘The Community Phone Project: An Overview’, <em>DKCRC Working Paper 46</em>, Alice Springs: Desert Knowledge CRC, 2009.</p>
<p>——— <em>Home Internet for Remote Indigenous Communities: Technical Report</em>, Alice Springs: Centre for Appropriate Technology, 2014.</p>
<p>Crump, B. and A. McIlroy. ‘The Digital Divide: Why the “Don’t-Want-Tos” Won't Compute: Lessons from a New Zealand ICT Project’, <em>First Monday</em> 8.12 (2003).</p>
<p>Daly, A.E. ‘Bridging the Digital Divide: The Role of Community Online Access Centres in Indigenous Communities’, Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2005.</p>
<p>Davenport, W.H. ‘Two Kinds of Value in the Eastern Solomon Islands’, in A. Appadurai (ed.) <em>The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective</em>, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1986, pp. 95-109.</p>
<p>Davies, S. <em>Urban Based Support for Rural and Remote Australian Telecommunications</em>, Broadband for the Bush Alliance, 2014.</p>
<p>DiMaggio, P. and E. Hargittai. ‘From the “Digital Divide” to “Digital Inequality”: Studying Internet Use as Penetration Increases’, Working Paper 15, Center for Arts and Cultural Policy Studies, Princeton University, 2001.</p>
<p>‘DIY Telecoms’. <em>The Economist</em>, <a href="http://www.economist.com/news/technology-quarterly/21645498-fed-up-failings-big-operators-remote-mexican-communities-are-acting"><em>http://www.economist.com/news/technology-quarterly/21645498-fed-up-failings-big-operators-remote-mexican-communities-are-acting</em></a>.</p>
<p>Donovan, M. ‘Is It a Digital Divide Because It’s No Good When Talking from an Aboriginal Point? Giving Aboriginal Design to Educational Practices’, <a href="http://www.persons.org.uk/ci/mm/nmtc/nmtc2/donovan%20paper.pdf"><em>http://www.persons.org.uk/ci/mm/nmtc/nmtc2/donovan%20paper.pdf</em></a>.</p>
<p>———. ‘Can Information Communication Technological Tools Be Used to Suit Aboriginal Learning Pedagogies’, <em>Information Technology and Indigenous People</em> (2007): 93-104.</p>
<p>Doron, A. and R. Jeffrey. <em>The Great Indian Phone Book: How the Cheap Cell Phone Changes Business, Politics, and Daily Life</em>, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2013.</p>
<p>Dutton, W.H., A. Shepherd and C. Di Gennaro. ‘Digital Divides and Choices Reconfiguring Access: National and Cross National Patterns of Internet Diffusion and Use’, in B. Anderson, M. Brynin, Y. Raban and J. Gershuny (eds) <em>Information and Communication Technologies in Society E-Living in a Digital Europe</em>, London: Routledge, 2007, pp. 31-45.</p>
<p>Dyson, L.E. ‘Design for a Culturally Affirming Indigenous Computer Literacy Course’, 2002.</p>
<p>Eady, M. and S. Woodcock. ‘Understanding the Need: Using Collaboratively Created Draft Guiding Principles to Direct Online Synchronous Learning in Indigenous Communities’, <em>International Journal for Educational Integrity</em> 6.2 (2010): 24-40.</p>
<p>Earl, P.E. ‘Economics and Psychology: A Survey’, <em>The Economic Journal</em> 100.402 (1990): 718-755.</p>
<p>Ellen, R. and R. Herrick. ‘John Elferink Dismisses Idea for Free Wi-Fi in Alice Springs Town Camps to Reduce Youth Crime’, <em>ABC News</em>, <a href="http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-10/elferink-dismisses-wi-fi-idea-for-alice-springs-town-camps/6384214"><em>http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-10/elferink-dismisses-wi-fi-idea-for-alice-springs-town-camps/6384214</em></a>.</p>
<p>Elliot, C. ‘Social Death and Disenfranchised Grief: An Alyawarr Case Study’ in K. Glaskin (ed.) <em>Mortality, Mourning and Mortuary Practices in Indigenous Australia</em>, London: Ashgate Publishing, 2008, pp. 103-120.</p>
<p>Enghel, F. and K. Wilkins. ‘Communication, Media and Development: Problems and Perspectives’, <em>Nordicom Review</em> 33 (Special Issue) (2012).</p>
<p>Ewing, S. and J. Thomas. <em>The Internet in Australia</em>, Brisbane: ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation, Queensland University of Technology, 2010.</p>
<p>Fairlie, R.W., D.O. Beltran and K.K. Das. ‘Home Computers and Educational Outcomes: Evidence from the NLSY97 and CPS<em>’, </em>Economic Inquiry* 48.3 (2010).</p>
<p>Featherstone, D. ‘The Aboriginal Invention of Broadband: How Yarnangu Are Using ICTs in the Ngaanyatjarra Lands of Western Australia’ in L. Ormond-Parker, A. Corn, C. Fforde, K. Obata and S. O’sullivan (eds) <em>Information Technologies and Indigenous Communities</em>, Canberra: AIATSIS Research Publications, 2013, pp. 27-52.</p>
<p>J. Finlayson, and A.J. Auld. ‘Shoe or Stew?: Balancing Wants and Needs in Indigenous Households: A Study of Appropriate Income Support Payments and Policies for Families’, <em>CAEPR Discussion Paper No. 182</em>, Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 1999.</p>
<p>Fitzgerald, L. ‘New 3G Network Falls Short for Stations and Communities Near Barrow Creek, Northern Territory’, <a href="http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-08-25/barrow-creek-3g-network-lacking/5693386"><em>http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-08-25/barrow-creek-3g-network-lacking/5693386</em></a>.</p>
<p>Fletcher, P. ‘Speech to the ACCAN USO Forum’, <a href="http://paulfletcher.com.au/speeches/portfolio-speeches/item/1316-speech-to-the-accan-uso-forum.html"><em>http://paulfletcher.com.au/speeches/portfolio-speeches/item/1316-speech-to-the-accan-uso-forum.html</em></a>.</p>
<p>Fogarty, W. <em>‘You Got Any Truck?’ Vehicles and Decentralised Mobile Service-Provision in Remote Indigenous Australia</em>, Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2005.</p>
<p>‘Free Wi-Fi in Town Camps Could Solve Anti-Social Youth Problem in Alice Springs, Says CAYLUS’, <a href="http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-08/free-wifi-in-alice-springs-town-camps-could-solve-youth-problems/6378914"><em>http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-08/free-wifi-in-alice-springs-town-camps-could-solve-youth-problems/6378914</em></a><a href="">.</a></p>
<p>Galperin, H. and J. Mariscal. ‘Digital Poverty: Latin American and Caribbean Perspectives’, <em>Practical Publishing</em>, <a href="http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Resources/Publications/openebooks/342-3/index.html"><em>http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Resources/Publications/openebooks/342-3/index.html</em></a>.</p>
<p>Galperin, H. and F. Bar. ‘The Microtelco Opportunity: Evidence from Latin America’, <em>Information Technologies &amp; International Development</em> 3.2 (2006): 73-86.</p>
<p>Ginsburg, F. ‘Rethinking the Digital Age’ in D. Hesmondhalgh and J. Toynbee (eds) <em>The Media and Social Theory,</em> New York: Routledge, 2008: 127-144.</p>
<p>Godinho, <em>V. Money, Financial Capability and Well-Being in Indigenous Australia</em>, PhD diss., Graduate School of Business and Law, RMIT University, Melbourne, 2014.</p>
<p>Goggin, G. and J. Clark. ‘Mobile Phones and Community Development: A Contact Zone between Media and Citizenship’, <em>Development in Practice</em> 19.4-5 (2009): 585-597.</p>
<p>Goolsbee, A. and P.J. Klenow. ‘Evidence on Learning and Network Externalities in the Diffusion of Home Computers’, <em>Journal of Law and Economics</em> 45.2 (2002): 317-343.</p>
<p>Granovetter, M.S. ‘The Strength of Weak Ties’, <em>American Journal of Sociology</em> (1973): 1360-1380.</p>
<p>Green, L., Brady, D., Olafsson, K., Hartley J. and C. Lumby. ‘Risks and Safety for Australian Children on the Internet: Full Findings from the AU Kids Online Survey of 9-16 Year Olds and Their Parents’, <em>Cultural Science Journal</em> 4.1 (2011): 1-73.</p>
<p>Grey-Gardner, R. and M. Young. <em>Utopia Homelands Project: Lessons from Experience</em>, Centre for Appropriate Technology, Urapuntja Aboriginal Corporation and the Australian Government Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, 2014.</p>
<p>Grissmer, D.W., R.F. Subotnik and M. Orland. <em>A Guide to Incorporating Multiple Methods in Randomized Controlled Trials to Assess Intervention Effects</em>, Washington, DC: American Psychological Association<em>,</em> 2009.</p>
<p>Hamilton, A. ‘A Complex Strategical Situation: Gender and Power in Aboriginal Australia’ in N. Grieve and P. Grimshaw (eds) <em>Australian Imjmen: Feminist Perspectives</em>, Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1981, pp. 69-85.</p>
<p>Harris, S. and J. Kinslow-Harris. <em>Culture and Learning: Tradition and Education in North-East Arnhem Land</em>, Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, 1980.</p>
<p>Harrison, N. <em>Teaching and Learning in Aboriginal Education</em>, Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2011.</p>
<p>Hartley, J. and J. Potts. <em>Cultural Science: A Natural History of Stories, Demes, Knowledge and Innovation</em>, London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2014.</p>
<p>Hartley, J. and E. Rennie. ‘Show Business for Ugly People? Media Politics and E-Democracy’, Australian Electronic Governance Conference, Melbourne, 14-15 April 2004.</p>
<p>Hatt, T., K. Okeleke and M. Meloan. ‘Closing the Coverage Gap: A View from Asia’, <em>GSMA Intelligence</em>, <a href="https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=e245c423854fcfd38eeae0a918cc91c8&amp;download" class="uri">https://gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=e245c423854fcfd38eeae0a918cc91c8&amp;download</a>.</p>
<p>Helsper, E. <em>Digital Inclusion: An Analysis of Social Disadvantage and the Information Society</em>, Department for Communities and Local Government, 2008.</p>
<p>———. ‘A Corresponding Fields Model for the Links Between Social and Digital Exclusion’, <em>Communication Theory</em> 22.4 (2012): 403-426.</p>
<p>Helsper, E., A. V’san Deursen and R. Eynon. <em>Tangible Outcomes of Internet Use: From Digital Skills to Tangible Outcomes Project Report</em>, Oxford Internet Institute, University of Twente and London School of Economics and Political Science, 2015.</p>
<p>Hems, L., C. Connolly, and M. Georgouras. ‘Measuring Financial Exclusion in Australia’, Centre for Social Impact (CSI), University of New South Wales, for National Australia Bank, 2012.</p>
<p>Hiatt, L. ‘Traditional Attitudes to Land Resources’ in R. M. Berndt (ed.) <em>Aboriginal Sites: Rites and Resource Development</em>, Perth: University of Western Australia Press, 1982, pp. 47-53.</p>
<p>Hilbert, M. ‘The End Justifies the Definition: The Manifold Outlooks on the Digital Divide and Their Practical Usefulness for Policy-Making’, <em>Telecommunications Policy</em> 35.8 (2011): 715-736.</p>
<p>Hinkson, M. ‘What’s in a Dedication? On Being a Warlpiri DJ’, <em>The Australian Journal of Anthropology</em> 15.2 (2004): 143-162.</p>
<p>Hogan, E. ‘Behind the Mulga Curtain’, <em>Inside Story</em>, 11 July 2014, http://insidestory.org.au/behind-the-mulga-curtain.</p>
<p>———. ‘Gender and ICT access in remote central Australian Aboriginal contexts’, <em>Australian Aboriginal Studies</em>, 2016.1 (2016).</p>
<p>Hogan, E., E. Rennie, A. Crouch, A. Wright, R. Gregory and J. Thomas. ‘Submission to the Inquiry into Issues Surrounding Cyber-Safety for Indigenous Australians’, Brisbane: ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation, Queensland University of Technology, 2013.</p>
<p>Howard, S. and E. Rennie. ‘Free for All: A Case Study Examining Implementation Factors of One-to-One Device Programs’, <em>Computers in the Schools</em> 30.4 (2013): 359-377.</p>
<p>Hughes, H. <em>Lands of Shame: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander ‘Homelands’ in Transition</em>, Sydney: Centre for Independent Studies, 2007.</p>
<p>Hughes, H. and M. Hughes. <em>Indigenous Education 2012</em>, Sydney: Centre for Independent Studies, 2012.</p>
<p>Hughes, P. and A.J. More. <em>Aboriginal Ways of Learning</em>, Adelaide: Paul Hughes, 2004.</p>
<p>———. ‘Aboriginal Ways of Learning and Learning Styles’, Brisbane: <em>Australian Association for Research in Education</em>, 1997.</p>
<p>Hunter, B. ‘Indigenous Social Exclusion: Insights and Challenges for the Concept of Social Inclusion’, <em>Family Matters</em>, 82 (2009): 52.</p>
<p>Huyer, S. and T. Sikoska. ‘Overcoming the Gender Digital Divide: Understanding ICTs and Their Potential for the Empowerment of Women’, INSTRAW Research Paper Series No. 1, 2003.</p>
<p>Indigenous Housing and Infrastructure Branch of the Department of Family and Community Services. <em>Review of the National Homelands Policy: Stage One</em>, Alice Springs: Centre for Appropriate Technology, 2004.</p>
<p>Introna, L.D., and H. Nissenbaum. ‘Shaping the Web: Why the Politics of Search Engines Matters’, <em>The Information Society</em> 16.3 (2000): 169-185.</p>
<p>Iten, L. <em>Cyber Safety Program Report</em>, Alice Springs: Northern Territory Library and Central Australian Youth Link Up Service, 2014.</p>
<p>Ito, M., J. Antin, M. Finn, A. Law, A. Manion, S. Mitnick, D. Schlossberg, S. Yardi and H. A. Horst, <em>Hanging Out, Messing Around, and Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with New Media</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009.</p>
<p>Johns, G. <em>No Job No House: An Economically Strategic Approach to Remote Aboriginal Housing</em>, Canberra: The Menzies Research Centre, 2009.</p>
<p>Joint Select Committee on Cyber-Safety. ‘High-Wire Act: Cyber-Safety and the Young’, <em>Interim Report</em>, Canberra, 2011.</p>
<p>Kaberry, P.M. <em>Aboriginal Women</em>, London: George Routledge and Sons Pty Ltd, 1939.</p>
<p>Keen, I. ‘The Interpretation of Aboriginal “Property” on the Australian Colonial Frontier’ in I. Keen (ed.) <em>Aboriginal Participation in Australian Economies: Historical and Anthropological Perspectives</em>, Canberra:: ANU Press, 2010.</p>
<p>Kerins, S. ‘The First-Ever Northern Territory Homelands/Outstations Policy’, <em>CAEPR Topical Issue No. 09/2009</em>, Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2009.</p>
<p>Kowal, E. ‘Is Culture the Problem or the Solution? Outstation Health and the Politics of Remoteness’ in J. Altman and M. Hinkson (eds) <em>Culture Crisis: Anthropology and Politics in Aboriginal Australia</em>, Sydney: University of New South Wales Press, 2010, pp. 253-276.</p>
<p>Kraemer, K. L., J. Dedrick and P. Sharma, ‘One Laptop Per Child: Vision Vs. Reality’, <em>Communications of the ACM</em> 52.6 (2009): 66-73.</p>
<p>Kral, I. <em>Plugged In: Remote Australian Indigenous Youth and Digital Culture,</em> Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2010.</p>
<p>———. ‘Youth Media as Cultural Practice: Remote Indigenous Youth Speaking Out Loud’, <em>Australian Aboriginal Studies</em>, 1 (2011): 4-16.</p>
<p>Kral, I. and I. Falk. <em>What Is All That Learning For? Indigenous Adult English Literacy Practices, Training, Community Capacity and Health</em>, Adelaide: NCVER, 2004.</p>
<p>Lattas, A. and B. Morris. ‘The Politics of Suffering and the Politics of Anthropology’ in J. Altman and M. Hinkson (eds) <em>Culture Crisis: Anthropology and Politics in Aboriginal Australia</em>, Sydney: University of New South Wales Press, 2010, pp. 97-133.</p>
<p>Lenovo. ‘TBR Quality Project’, <a href="http://www.partnerinfo.lenovo.com/partners/us/products/downloads/thinkcentre-mseries/TBR-Quality-Study-ExecSummary.pdf"><em>http://www.partnerinfo.lenovo.com/partners/us/products/downloads/thinkcentre-mseries/TBR-Quality-Study-ExecSummary.pdf</em></a>.</p>
<p>Liston, G. ‘Remote Community Hopes to Erect Giant Neon Crucifix’, <em>ABC News,</em> <a href="http://www.abc.net.au/news/2008-09-25/fiery-debate-over-dpp-decision/521100"><em>http://www.abc.net.au/news/2008-09-25/fiery-debate-over-dpp-decision/521100</em></a>.</p>
<p>Livingstone, S. and L. Haddon. <em>EU Kids Online: Final Report</em>, London: EU Kids Online, 2009.</p>
<p>Livingstone, S. ‘Taking Risky Opportunities in Youthful Content Creation: Teenagers’ Use of Social Networking Sites for Intimacy, Privacy and Self-Expression’, <em>New Media &amp; Society</em> 10.3 (2008): 393-411.</p>
<p>Livingstone, S. and E. Helsper. ‘Gradations in Digital Inclusion: Children, Young People and the Digital Divide’, <em>New Media &amp; Society</em> 9.4 (2007): 671-696.</p>
<p>Loewenstein, G. and S. Issacharoff. ‘Source Dependence in the Valuation of Objects’, <em>Journal of Behavioral Decision Making</em> 7.3 (1994): 157-168.</p>
<p>Lydon, J. ‘“Our Sense of Beauty”: Visuality, Space and Gender on Victoria’s Aboriginal Reserves, South-Eastern Australia’, <em>History and Anthropology</em> 16.2 (2005): 211-233.</p>
<p>Macdonald, G. ‘Economies and Personhood: Demand Sharing among the Wiradjuri of New South Wales’ in G. Wenzel, G. Hovelsrud-Broda and N. Kishigami (eds) <em>The Social Economy of Sharing: Resource Allocation and Modern Hunter-Gatherers</em>, Osaka: National Museum of Ethnology, 2000, pp. 87-111.</p>
<p>Mahon, A. ‘Deadly Dreaming: Bi-Cultural Strategies for Working with Indigenous Adults in Education’, Australian Council for Adult Literacy conference, Surfers Paradise, Australia, 3-4 October, 2008, <a href="http://www.acal.edu.au/conference/08/Deadly_Dreaming_Mahon.pdf"><em>http://www.acal.edu.au/conference/08/Deadly_Dreaming_Mahon.pdf</em></a>.</p>
<p>Malin, M. and D. Maidment. ‘Evaluation of Irrkerlantye Learning Centre’, unpublished report, Darwin: Cooperative Research Centre for Aboriginal and Tropical Health, 2003.</p>
<p>Mares, P. ‘Homeland Security: NT Indigenous Affairs Minister Outlines Policy’, <em>ABC News,</em> <em>http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/nationalinterest/homeland-security-nt-indigenous-affairs-minister/3147812#transcript</em>.</p>
<p>Mayne, A. <em>Alternative Interventions. Aboriginal Homelands, Outback Australia and the Centre for Appropriate Technology</em>, Adelaide: Wakefield Press, 2014.</p>
<p>Mazzarella, W. ‘Beautiful Balloon: The Digital Divide and the Charisma of New Media in India’, <em>American Ethnologist</em> 374 (2010): 783-804.</p>
<p>McCallum, K. and F. Papandrea. ‘Community Business: The Internet in Remote Australian Indigenous Communities’, <em>New Media &amp; Society</em> (2009): 1230-1251.</p>
<p>McElhinney, S. ‘Telecommunications Liberalisation and the Quest for Universal Service in Australia’, <em>Telecommunications Policy</em> 25.4 (2001): 233-248.</p>
<p>McGregor, R. <em>Indifferent Inclusion: Aboriginal People and the Australian Nation</em>, Canberra: Canberra Aboriginal Studies Press, 2011.</p>
<p>Merlan, F. ‘Gender in Aboriginal Society: A Review’, in R.M. Berndt and R. Tonkinson (eds) <em>Social Anthropology and Australian Aboriginal Studies</em>, Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press, 1988, pp. 15-76.</p>
<p>Michaels, E. <em>The Aboriginal Invention of Television in Central Australia, 1982-1986: Report of the Fellowship to Assess the Impact of Television in Remote Aboriginal Communities</em>, Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, 1986.</p>
<p>———. <em>Bad Aboriginal Art and Other Essays: Tradition, Media, and Technological Horizons</em>, Vol. 3, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1994.</p>
<p>Miller, D. and H.A. Horst. ‘The Digital and the Human: A Prospectus for Digital Anthropology’ in H. A. Horst and D. Miller (eds) <em>Digital Anthropology</em>, London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2013, pp. 3-35.</p>
<p>Moran, M. ‘The Viability of “Hub” Settlements’, <em>Dialogue</em> 29.1 (2010): 38-51.</p>
<p>Morsillo, R. ‘Affordable Broadband for All Australians’, <em>Telecommunications Journal of Australia</em> 62.5 (2012): 78.1-78.16.</p>
<p>Musharbash, Y. ‘“Only Whitefella Take That Road”: Culture Seen Through the Intervention at Yuendumu’, in Hinkson (eds) <em>Culture Crisis: Anthropology and Politics in Aboriginal Australia</em>, Sydney: University of New South Wales Press, 2010, pp. 302-318.</p>
<p>———. <em>Yuendumu Everyday: Contemporary Life in Remote Aboriginal Australia</em>, Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press, 2009.</p>
<p>Myers, F. ‘Burning the Truck and Holding the Country: Pintupi Forms of Property and Identity’, in E.N. Wilmsen (eds) <em>We Are Here: Politics of Aboriginal Land Tenure</em>, Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1989, pp. 15-42.</p>
<p>———. ‘Introduction: The Empire of Things’, in F. Myers (ed.) <em>The Empire of Things: Regimes of Value and Material Culture</em>, Santa Fe: School of American Research Press, 2001, pp. 3-64.</p>
<p>———. <em>Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self: Sentiment, Place and Politics Among Western Desert Aborigines</em>, Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1986.</p>
<p>———. <em>Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self: Sentiment, Place, and Politics Among Western Desert Aborigines</em>, Washington DC: Smithsonian Institute, 1986.</p>
<p>———. ‘Place, Identity and Exchange in a Totemic System: Nurturance and the Process of Social Reproduction in Pintupi Society’, in J. Fajans (ed.) <em>Exchanging Products: Producing Exchange</em>, Sydney: University of Sydney, 1993, pp. 3-57.</p>
<p>———. ‘Some Properties of Culture and Persons’, in R.A. Ghosh (ed.) <em>CODE: Collaborative Ownership and the Digital Economy</em>, Cambridge MA London: MIT Press, 2005, pp. 45-60.</p>
<p>Nafus, D. and J. Sherman. ‘Big Data, Big Questions: This One Does Not Go Up to 11: The Quantified Self Movement as an Alternative Big Data Practice’, <em>International Journal of Communication</em> 8 (2014): 11.</p>
<p>Nicholls, A.V. <em>The Social Life of the Computer in Ramingining,</em> Darwin: Charles Darwin University, 2009.</p>
<p>Nobbs, C. ‘Ara Irititja: Protecting the Past, Accessing the Future: Indigenous Memories in a Digital Age’, <em>Artlink</em> 24.1 (2004): 50-51.</p>
<p>Norris, P. <em>The Worldwide Digital Divide,</em> Annual Meeting of the Political Studies Association of the UK, London School of Economics and Political Science, 10-13 April 2000.</p>
<p>Northern Territory Department of Education. <em>Learning Lessons: An Independent Review of Indigenous Education in the Northern Territory</em>, Darwin: Northern Territory Department of Education, 1999, <a href="http://www.education.nt.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/7475/learning_lessons_review.pdf"><em>http://www.education.nt.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/7475/learning_lessons_review.pdf</em></a>.</p>
<p>———. ‘Enrolment and Attendance Statistics’, <a href="http://www.education.nt.gov.au/students/at-school/enrolment-attendance/enrolment-attendance-statistics/2013-enrolment-and-attendance-statistics"><em>http://www.education.nt.gov.au/students/at-school/enrolment-attendance/enrolment-attendance-statistics/2013-enrolment-and-attendance-statistics</em></a>.</p>
<p>Northern Territory Government Department of Corporate and Information Services, Submission to the Regional Telecommunications Independent Review Committee, 2015, <a href="https://www.communications.gov.au/sites/g/files/net301/f/Northern%20Territory%20Government%20-%20Public%20Submission%20RTIRC%202015.pdf"><em>https://www.communications.gov.au/sites/g/files/net301/f/Northern%20Territory%20Government%20-%20Public%20Submission%20RTIRC%202015.pdf</em></a>.</p>
<p>Nussbaum, M. ‘Capabilities as Fundamental Entitlements: Sen and Social Justice’, <em>Feminist Economics</em> 9.2-3 (2003): 33-59.</p>
<p>O’Connell, J.F. ‘Room to Move: Contemporary Alyawara Settlement Patterns and Their Implications for Aboriginal Housing Policy’ in M. Heppell (ed.) <em>A Black Reality: Aboriginal Camps and Housing in Remote Australia</em>, Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, 1979, pp. 97-120.</p>
<p>Olsen, P. ‘Teenagers Say Goodbye to Facebook and Hello to Messenger Apps’, <em>The Guardian</em>, 10 November 2013.</p>
<p>Ormond-Parker, L., A. Corn, K. Obata and S. O’Sullivan, (eds). <em>Information Technology and Indigenous Communities,</em> AIATSIS National Indigenous Studies Conference, 2009 and Information Technologies and Indigenous Communities Symposium, 2010, Canberra: AIATSIS, 2013.</p>
<p>Parliament of Australia Senate Standing Committee on Community Affairs. <em>Inquiry into Issues Surrounding Cyber-Safety for Indigenous Australians</em>, Canberra: Joint Select Committee on Cyber-Safety, 2013.</p>
<p>Pearce, K.E. and R.E. Rice. ‘Digital Divides from Access to Activities: Comparing Mobile and Personal Computer Internet Users’, <em>Journal of Communication</em> 63.4 (2013): 721-744.</p>
<p>Pearson, N. <em>Radical Hope: Education and Equality in Australia.</em> Melbourne: Schwartz Publishing, 2011.</p>
<p>Peter Farr Consultants Australasia. <em>Connecting Our Communities: Sustainable Networking Strategies for Australian Remote Indigenous Communities</em>, Canberra: Department of Communications, Information Technology and the Arts, 2003.</p>
<p>Peterson, N. ‘Demand Sharing: Reciprocity and the Pressure for Generosity Among Foragers’, <em>American Anthropologist</em> 95.4 (1993): 860-874.</p>
<p>Pierce, J.L., T. Kostova and K.T. Dirks. ‘The State of Psychological Ownership: Integrating and Extending a Century of Research’, <em>Review of General Psychology</em> 7.1 (2003): 84.</p>
<p>Raiche, H. <em>Universal Communications in a Broadband World: Working Paper,</em> Inaugural Australian Communications Consumer Action Network (ACCAN) Conference, Melbourne, 2010.</p>
<p>Razak, I. ‘Telstra Accused of Ripping Off Aborigines’, <em>ABC News</em>, <a href="http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2009/09/09/2680645"><em>http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2009/09/09/2680645</em></a>.</p>
<p>Regional Telecommunications Independent Review Committee. <em>Regional Telecommunications Review 2015: Unlocking the Potential in Regional Australia</em>, Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia, 2015.</p>
<p>Regional Telecommunications Inquiry. <em>Connecting Regional Australia</em>, Canberra: Department of Communications, Information Technology and the Arts, 2002.</p>
<p>Renfrew, C. ‘Varna and the Emergence of Wealth in Prehistoric Europe’ in A. Appadurai (ed.) <em>The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective</em>, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988, pp. 141-168.</p>
<p>Rennie, E. ‘Internet on the Outstation’, <em>Inside Story,</em> 9 May 2011, <a href="http://insidestory.org.au/internet-on-the-outstation"><em>http://insidestory.org.au/internet-on-the-outstation</em></a>.</p>
<p>Rennie, E., A. Crouch, J. Thomas and P. Taylor. ‘Beyond Public Access? Reconsidering Broadband for Remote Indigenous Communities’<em>, Communication, Politics &amp; Culture</em> 43.1 (2010): 48-69.</p>
<p>Rennie, E., A. Crouch, A. Wright and J. Thomas. <em>Home Internet for Remote Indigenous Communities</em>, Australian Communications Consumer Action Network, 2011.</p>
<p>———. ‘At Home on the Outstation: Barriers to Home Internet in Remote Indigenous Communities’, <em>Telecommunications Policy</em> 37.6 (2013): 583–593.</p>
<p>Rennie, E. and J. Potts. ‘Auction Subsidies and the Universal Service Obligation: The Case for Remote Indigenous Communities’, Submission to the Regional Telecommunications Independent Review (RTIRC), 2015.</p>
<p>Rennie, E. and J. Hartley. <em>The Story So Far: Digital Storytelling, Narrative and the New Literacy</em>, Image, Text and Sound Conference, School of Creative Media, RMIT, Melbourne 2004.</p>
<p>Rhizomatica. ‘About’, <a href="http://rhizomatica.org/about-2/"><em>http://rhizomatica.org/about-2/</em></a>.</p>
<p>Robinson, G. ‘Families, Generations, and Self: Conflict, Loyalty, and Recognition in an Australian Aboriginal Society’, <em>Ethos</em> 25.3 (1997): 303-332.</p>
<p>Robinson, J.A., and R.M. Nichol. ‘Building Bridges Between Aboriginal and Western Mathematics: Creating an Effective Mathematics Learning Environment’, <em>Education in Rural Australia</em> 8.2 (1998): 9-17.</p>
<p>Rogers, E.M. <em>Diffusion of Innovations</em>, 5th ed, New York: Free Press, 2003.</p>
<p>Rowse, T, ‘Re-figuring “Indigenous culture”’ in J. Altman and M. Hinkson (eds) <em>Culture Crisis: Anthropology and Politics in Aboriginal Australia</em>, Kensington: UNSW Press, 2010, pp. 153-178.</p>
<p>Sanders, W. <em>Working Future: A Critique of Policy by Numbers</em>, Canberra: Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2010.</p>
<p>Sandvig, C. ‘The Internet as an Infrastructure’, <em>The Oxford Handbook of Internet Studies</em>, 2013, 86-108.</p>
<p>Sansom, B. <em>The Camp at Wallaby Cross: Aboriginal Fringe Dwellers in Darwin</em>, Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, 1980.</p>
<p>Schwab, R.G. <em>The Calculus of Reciprocity: Principles and Implications of Aboriginal Sharing</em>, Canberra: Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 1995.</p>
<p>Seemann, K.W., M. Parnell, S. McFallan and S. Tucker. <em>Housing for Livelihoods: The Lifecycle of Housing and Infrastructure Through a Whole-of-System Approach in Remote Aboriginal Settlements</em>, Vol. 29, Alice Springs: Desert Knowledge CRC, 2008.</p>
<p>Selwyn, N. ‘Reconsidering Political and Popular Understandings of the Digital Divide’, <em>New Media &amp; Society</em> 6.3 (2004): 341-362.</p>
<p>Selwyn, N., S. Gorard and J. Furlong. ‘Whose Internet Is It Anyway? Exploring Adults’ (Non) Use of the Internet in Everyday Life’, <em>European Journal of Communication</em> 20.1 (2005): 5-26.</p>
<p>Sen, A. <em>Social Exclusion: Concept, Application, and Scrutiny</em>, Asian Development Bank, 2000.</p>
<p>Servaes, J. ‘Introduction’ in J. Servaes (ed.) <em>Communication for Development and Social Change</em>, New Delhi: Sage, 2008, pp. 14-30.</p>
<p>Shaw, G., and P. D’Abbs. <em>Community Safety and Wellbeing Research Study: Consolidated Report</em>, Canberra: Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs, 2011.</p>
<p>Sleath, E. and N. Maloney. ‘Mobile Phone Hotspots Trialled in the Outback’, <em>ABC News,</em> <a href="http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2015/03/16/4198439.htm"><em>http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2015/03/16/4198439.htm</em></a>.</p>
<p>Smith, D.E. <em>Toward an Aboriginal Household Expenditure Survey: Conceptual, Methodological and Cultural Considerations</em>, Canberra: ANU Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 1991.</p>
<p>Sreekumar, T.T., and M. Rivera–Sánchez. ‘ICTs and Development: Revisiting the Asian Experience’, <em>Science Technology &amp; Society</em> 13.2 (2008): 159-174.</p>
<p>Sutton, P. <em>The Politics of Suffering: Indigenous Australia and the End of the Liberal Consensus</em>, Carlton: Melbourne University Publishing, 2009.</p>
<p>Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council. <em>Ingerrekenhe Antirrkweme: Mobile Phone Use Among Low Income Aboriginal People: A Central Australian Snapshot</em>, Alice Springs: Tangentyere Council Research Hub and Central Land Council, 2007.</p>
<p>Tanner, S. <em>Measuring the Impact of Digital Resources: The Balanced Value Impact Model</em>, London: King’s College, 2012.</p>
<p>Taylor, J. ‘Housing Programs at Edward River and Mitchell River Aboriginal Reserves’ in M. Heppell (ed.) <em>A Black Reality: Aboriginal Camps and Housing in Remote Australia</em>, Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, 1979, pp. 207-228.</p>
<p>———. <em>Population and Diversity: Policy Implications of Emerging Indigenous Demographic Trends</em>, Canberra: Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, 2006.</p>
<p><em>Telecommunications Action Plan for Remote Indigenous Communities, Report on the Strategic Study for Improving Telecommunications in Remote Indigenous Communities</em>, Canberra: Department of Communications, Information Technology and the Arts, 2002.</p>
<p>Telstra. ‘Universal Service Obligation Standard Marketing Plan’, <a href="https://www.telstra.com.au/content/dam/tcom/personal/consumer-advice/doc/consumer/uso-standard-marketing-plan.doc"><em>https://www.telstra.com.au/content/dam/tcom/personal/consumer-advice/doc/consumer/uso-standard-marketing-plan.doc</em></a>.</p>
<p>Tenhunen, S. ‘Mobile Technology in the Village: ICTs, Culture, and Social Logistics in India’, <em>Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</em> 14.3 (2008): 515-534.</p>
<p>Thas, A., C. Ramilo and C. Cinoco. ‘Gender and ICT’, <em>UNDP Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme E-Primer</em>, New Delhi: Elsevier, 2007.</p>
<p>———. ‘Inquiry into Petrol Sniffing and Substance Abuse in Central Australia’, Commonwealth of Australia, <a href="http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Community_Affairs/Completed_inquiries/2008-10/petrol_sniffing_substance_abuse08/index"><em>http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Community_Affairs/Completed_inquiries/2008-10/petrol_sniffing_substance_abuse08/index</em></a>.</p>
<p>Thomson, D. F. <em>Bindibu Country</em>, Melbourne: Thomas Nelson, 1975.</p>
<p>Thorner, S. ‘Imagining an Indigital Interface: Ara Irititja Indigenizes the Technologies of Knowledge Management’, <em>Collections</em> 6.3 (2010): 125-146.</p>
<p>Tingle, L. <em>Political Amnesia: How We Forgot How to Govern</em>, Quarterly Essay, Melbourne: Black Inc., 2015.</p>
<p>Tonkinson, R. <em>The Jigalong Mob: Aboriginal Victors of the Desert Crusade</em>, Menlo Park, Calif: Cummings Publishing Company, 1974.</p>
<p>US Department of Commerce. <em>A Nation Online: How Americans Are Expanding Their Use of the Internet</em>, Economics and Statistics Administration and National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 2002.</p>
<p>Van Deursen, A., J. Van Dijk. ‘Increasing Inequalities in What We Do Online: A Longitudinal Cross Sectional Analysis of Internet Activities Among the Dutch Population (2010 to 2013) over Gender, Age, Education, and Income’, <em>Telematics and Informatics</em> 32.2 (2015): 259-272.</p>
<p>Van Dijk, J. and K. Hacker. ‘The Digital Divide as a Complex and Dynamic Phenomenon’, <em>The Information Society</em> 19.4 (2003): 315-326.</p>
<p>Vanstone, A. <em>Beyond Conspicuous Compassion: Indigenous Australians Deserve More Than Good Intentions</em>, Address to the Australia and New Zealand School of Government, Australian National University, Canberra, 7 December 2005.</p>
<p>Verran, H. and M. Christie. ‘Postcolonial Databasing? Subverting Old Appropriations, Developing New Associations’ in J. Leach and L. Wilson (eds) <em>Subversion, Conversion, Development: Diversity and the Adoption and Use of Information and Communication Technologies</em>, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2014, pp. 57-76.</p>
<p>Vodafone Hutchison Australia. <em>Regional Telecommunications Review 2015: Submission by Vodafone Hutchison Australia</em>, 2015.</p>
<p>Warschauer, M. ‘Dissecting the “Digital Divide”: A Case Study in Egypt’, <em>The Information Society</em> 19.4 (2003): 297-304.</p>
<p>Warschauer, M. and T. Matuchniak, ‘New Technology and Digital Worlds: Analyzing Evidence of Equity in Access, Use, and Outcomes’, <em>Review of Research in Education</em> 34.1 (2010): 180.</p>
<p>Weber, S. and S. Dixon. <em>Growing Up Online: Young People and Digital Technologies</em>, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.</p>
<p>Weiner, A.B. ‘Cultural Difference and the Density of Objects’, <em>American Ethnologist</em> 21.2 (1994): 391-403.</p>
<p>Wilson, K.R., J.S. Wallin and C. Reiser. ‘Social Stratification and the Digital Divide’, <em>Social Science Computer Review</em> 21.2 (2003): 133-143.</p>
<p>Woolcock, M. and D. Narayan. ‘Social Capital: Implications for Development Theory, Research, and Policy’, <em>The World Bank Research Observer</em> 15, no. 2 (2000): 225-249.</p>
<p>Yunkaporta, T. <em>Aboriginal Pedagogies at the Cultural Interface,</em> Professional Doctorate (Research) thesis, James Cook University, Townsville, Qld, 2009.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>

